Overview: 
Y²KS is an almost entirely suffixing language, with noun inflection being more fusional and verb inflection being more agglutinative. The language is generally SOV and underlyingly nominative-accusative, although its case marking appears more ergative-absolutive on the surface. Prepositional phrases tend to come between direct objects and verbs. Noun and verb phrases tend to be head-final, but the language makes use of prepositions, and conjunctions generally appear at the beginnings of clauses.

Nouns and Adjectives:
Nouns inflect for four cases (absolutive, ergative, dative, and genitive), three numbers (singular, dual, and plural), three "states" (governed, construct, and absolute), and definiteness. Case, number, state, and definiteness are all generally expressed together by a single suffix. Adjectives agree with the noun they modify. 

The following nominal suffixes can be found in the text:
-iyi¹: absolutive singular indefinite (governed state)
-iyat²: absolutive plural indefinite (governed state)
-iyin¹: absolutive singular definite (governed state)
-iyand²: absolutive plural definite (governed state)
-am³: ergative singular indefinite (governed state)
-aman³: ergative singular definite (governed state)
-ayin⁴: dative singular definite (governed state)
-ayant⁴: genitive singular definite (governed state)
-ayasyand⁴: genitive plural definite (governed state)

-iwēn²: absolutive singular definite (construct state)
-iwēnd²: absolutive plural definite (construct state)
-ulun³: ergative singular definite (construct state)
-uldun³: ergative dual definite (construct state)
-awayin⁴: dative singular definite (construct state)
-awayidun⁴: dative dual definite (construct state)
-ayant⁴: genitive singular definite (construct state)

-is: ergative singular indefinite (absolute state)
-irat: ergative plural indefinite (absolute state)
-ayant⁴: genitive singular definite (absolute state)

¹The sequence -iyi- present in these suffixes becomes -ī- after a consonant and -yyi- after a vowel. 
²The -i- found at the beginning of these suffixes becomes -y- after a vowel and is deleted after a consonant, but remains after two consonants.
³When these suffixes are attached to nominals ending in vowels, the resulting sequences of vowels either contract, or an epenthetic consonant is added (a-a > ā, ē-u > ēwu, ē-a > ēya). 
⁴When these suffixes are attached to nominals ending in vowels, the resulting sequences of vowels either contract, or an epenthetic consonant is added (a-a > ā, u-a > uwa). After consonants, including epenthetic ones, the sequences -ayi-, -aya-, and -awa- present in these suffixes surface as -ē-, -ē-, and -ō-, respectively. 

The absolutive case is used when a noun is the direct object of a transitive verb or the sole argument of an intransitive verb. It is the default/citation form of a noun. The ergative case is used when a noun is the subject of a transitive verb or part of a prepositional phrase that does not involve movement. The dative case is used when a noun is the indirect object of a verb or part of a prepositional phrase that involves movement. The genitive case is used for possessors. 

The singular is used when there is only one of something. The dual is used when there are exactly two of something. The plural is used when there are three or more of something, although some nouns are always plural.

The absolute state is used when a noun appears in a clause with no verb, usually due to the copula being left implied in the nonpast indicative:  

usōnin raˤˤin 
usōn-in raˤˤ-in 
cat-ABS.ABSOL.SG.DEF big-ABS.ABSOL.SG.DEF 
the cat is big

Nouns in such zero-copula clauses are typically in the absolutive case as well as the absolute state, but the other cases can also appear in the absolute state. A possessor in a zero-copula clause is in the genitive case and absolute state. Nouns in the ergative or genitive cases in the absolute state are typically found in prepositional phrases, including many adverbial expressions. There are few, if any, true adverbs in Y²KS, with prepositional phrases generally being used instead. 

Additionally, when a prepositional phrase is not meant to be taken literally, the absolute state is often used. Compare the following examples, the first using the absolute state to emphasize the less-literal meaning:

fiš-šuḫērand mikwarirand 
fiš=šuḫa-irand mikwar-irand 
in=PROX-ERG.ABSOL.PL.DEF full_day-ERG.ABSOL.PL.DEF 
these days, in this day and age, nowadays  

fiš-šuḫāmyand mikwaramyand 
fiš=šuḫa-amyand mikwar-amyand 
in=PROX-ERG.GOV.PL.DEF full_day-ERG.GOV.PL.DEF 
on these particular days

The construct state is used when a noun is possessed. If a noun meets the conditions for both the absolute and construct states, it is put in the construct state. It's possible for a noun to be simultaneously possessed and a possessor, in which case it is placed in the genitive case and construct state. However, the genitive singular and dual case endings are identical across all three states, and the genitive plural endings are identical in the construct and absolute states:

tēnēsyand āššēsand yubwēnd 
tēn-ayasyand āšš-ayasand yub-iwēnd
woman-GEN.GOV.PL.DEF sister-GEN.CONST.PL.DEF house-ABS.CONST.PL.DEF 
the women's sisters' houses

Finally, the governed state is used in all other situations.   

Definiteness is fairly straightforward, although Y²KS is generally more keen to explicitly mark it than English. Possessed nouns and those modified by numerals are almost always morphologically definite. Abstract concepts and things being spoken of in general or groups being treated as a whole are often definite:  

sōfsulīn 
sōfsul-iyin 
consciousness-ABS.GOV.SG.DEF 
(the) consciousness  

lētyand 
lēt-iyand 
wild_pig-ABS.GOV.PL.DEF
the wild pigs, wild pigs in general, all wild pigs as a whole

Finally, reduplication of the root can be used to form comparative adjectives.

Pronouns, Determiners, and Conjunctions: 
Pronouns are not marked for state or case, except for the genitive. There are dual and plural personal pronouns, but they are not regularly derived from their singular counterparts.  

The following pronouns can be found in the text: 
sē: 1st person singular  
sayyas: 1st person singular genitive/possessive
ḥun: 3rd person singular
ḥunyas: 3rd person singular genitive/possessive
ka: 3rd person plural
kēs: 3rd person plural genitive/possessive

kāt: everything

Pronouns are not specified for gender or animacy. kāt is treated as grammatically plural, and all pronouns are treated as grammatically definite. 

Pronouns are almost never dropped. If multiple adjacent clauses all share a subject, and the subject is first introduced as a pronoun, it may sometimes be left out after appearing in the first clause. However, it is considered proper in formal speech and writing to repeat the pronoun in each clause. 

The following determiners, which decline like nominals and behave like adjectives, can be found in the text:
kād-: all, every
šuḫa-: this, these

The following conjunctions can be found in the text:
din: that
tē: and
wē: which, who, that, etc.

wē introduces a relative clause modifying the noun or pronoun immediately before it. If that noun or pronoun is not the subject of the relative clause, however, a resumptive pronoun will appear:

tēnīn wē sē ḥun wilušaḥičmin  
tēn-iyin wē sē ḥun wil-u-ša-ḥič-mi-n 
woman-ABS.GOV.SG.DEF REL 1s 3s see-IND-PST-DPs-SG-DEF 
the woman (whom) I saw

tē can be used to connect either phrases or entire clauses. din introduces complement clauses and subordinate clauses. When more than two phrases/clauses are being introduced by the same conjunction, in formal speech and writing, it is considered proper to repeat the conjunction before every phrase or clause. 

Tēnaman īsī, tē banī, tē usōnīdu, tē faryat wiluyu.
tēn-aman īs-iyi tē ban-iyi tē usōn-iyidu tē far-iyat wil-u-yu
woman-ERG.GOV.SG.DEF sheep-ABS.GOV.SG.INDEF and cow-ABS.GOV.SG.INDEF and cat-ABS.GOV.DU.INDEF and bee-ABS.GOV.PL.INDEF see-IND-PL
The woman sees a sheep, a cow, two cats, and some bees.

Sē din ˤi šu-sayyas yubōyin suwiywašaḥič, tē din ˤi sayyas kādwēnd ḥiyyiwēnd jadwašaḥičyun, tē din ˤi sayyas ḫattuywēn datēywašaḥičmin sāḫuḥičyun.
sē din ˤi šu=sayyas yub-awayin suwi-iwa-ša-ḥič tē din ˤi sayyas kād-iwēnd ḥiyy-iwēnd jad-iwa-ša-ḥič-yu-n tē din ˤi sayyas ḫattu-iwēn datē-iwa-ša-ḥič-mi-n sāḫ-u-ḥič-yu-n
1s SUB 2s to=1s.POSS house-DAT.CONST.SG.DEF come-SJV-PST-DPs and SUB 2s 1s.POSS all-ABS.CONST.PL.DEF egg-ABS.CONST.PL.DEF eat-SJV-PST-DPs-PL-DEF and SUB 2s 1s.POSS dog-ABS.CONST.SG.DEF steal-SJV-PST-DPs-SG-DEF remember-IND-DPs-PL-DEF
I remember that you came to my house, ate all of my eggs, and stole my dog.

Prepositions: 
All prepositions are proclitics. Orthographically, they are written with a hyphen separating them from the first element of the following phrase. Some prepositions may have different meanings depending on whether they are used with the ergative or dative case. The dative tends to imply movement, while the ergative is more likely to be used with expressions of time.

The following prepositions can be found in the text: 
bēt-: without (ERG)
fiš¹-: at (ERG), in (ERG), while (ERG), around (DAT)
lib-: like (ERG), as (ERG)
lōˀ²-: with (ERG), for (ERG)
rus-³: out from (DAT), before (ERG), until (ERG)
šu-: into (DAT), after (ERG), since (ERG), to (DAT)

¹The -š- becomes -s- before alveolar sibilants (š-s > s-s, š-c > s-c). 
²The -ˀ- fully assimilates to any following consonant (ˀ-s > s-s).
³The -s- becomes -š- before post-alveolar sibilants (s-š > š-š).

lōˀ- is used with pronouns to mean "for" in expressions like "it's possible for me (to…)". As mentioned above, the language generally omits the copula in the nonpast indicative. Predicative adjectives are typically nominalized and preceded by lib-, especially if the copula is not omitted. 

Din sē dārumwašaḥič lib-dayyasulam lōs-sē yēwu.
din sē dārum-iwa-ša-ḥič lib=dayyasul-am lōˀ=sē yē-u
SUB 1s sleep-SJV-PST-DPs as=possibility-ERG.GOV.SG.INDEF with=1s be-IND
It's possible that I was sleeping/I could have been sleeping/It's possible that I was able to sleep.

Sayyas dārumnēywēn lib-dayyasulis lōs-sē.
sayyas dārumnē-iwēn lib=dayyasul-is lōˀ=sē
1s.POSS sleeping-ABS.CONST.SG.DEF as=possibility-ERG.ABSOL.SG.INDEF with=1s
It's possible that I was sleeping/I could have been sleeping/It's possible that I was able to sleep.

Note that Y²KS tends to express things like "I can (do)…" or "I must (do)…" as "that I do… is possible" or "doing… is necessary for me". 

Some English prepositions are equivalent to longer phrases:

fiš-yubēnt jafudulun
fiš=yub-ayant jafud-ulun
at=house-GEN.GOV.SG.DEF head-ERG.CONST.SG.DEF
above the house

fiš-yubēnt karnuldun
fiš=yub-ayant karn-uldun
at=house-GEN.GOV.SG.DEF foot-ERG.CONST.DU.DEF
under the house

Finally, as mentioned earlier, prepositional phrases typically take the place of adverbs. Some concepts that adjectives are used to express in English are expressed via prepositional phrases as well. A few examples:

lif-tōlis šundis
lib=tōl-is šund-is
as=angry-ERG.ABSOL.SG.INDEF way-ERG.ABSOL.SG.INDEF
angrily/in an angry way

lōs-sājaraman
lōˀ=sājar-aman
with=truth-ERG.GOV.SG.DEF
truly/truthfully

Verbs: 
Verbs inflect for the person and number of the subject (3rd person vs. discourse participant, singular vs. dual vs. plural), the number of the object (singular vs. dual vs. plural), the definiteness of the object (indefinite vs. definite), tense (past vs. nonpast), and mood (indicative vs. subjunctive). Verbal suffixes are mostly agglutinative. The paradigm is as follows:  

[size=85]ROOT-MOOD-TENSE-SUBJECT.PERSON.NUMBER-OBJECT.NUMBER-OBJECT.DEFINITENESS[/size]

The following verbal suffixes can be found in the text:
-u¹-: indicative mood 
-iwa²-: subjunctive mood  

-Ø-: nonpast tense 
-ša-: past tense  

-ḥič-: singular discourse participant (1st or 2nd person) subject 
-Ø-: singular 3rd person subject 
-jarrū-: plural 3rd person subject  

-mi-: singular object 
-yu-: plural object  

-Ø: indefinite object 
-n: definite object  

¹When this suffix is attached to verbs ending in vowels, either one of the vowels becomes an approximant or an epenthetic consonant is added (ē-u > ēwu, i-u > yu).  
²The -i- found at the beginning of this suffix becomes -y- after a vowel and is deleted after a consonant, but remains after two consonants.

Third person singular subjects are unmarked, and first and second person subjects are grouped together as "discourse participants".   

Verbs agree with their direct objects in definiteness and number. Indefinite objects are unmarked. All pronouns are considered definite, as are clauses headed by din. 

Number agreement, for both subjects and objects, is determined by the total number of arguments. If a verb has, for instance, three singular objects, it will take the plural object agreement marker, because there are three objects in total:

Šulāman banī, tē īsī, tē ūfayyi wilušayu.
šula-aman ban-iyi tē īs-iyi tē ūfa-iyi wil-u-ša-yu
man-ERG.GOV.SG.DEF cow-ABS.GOV.SG.INDEF and sheep-ABS.GOV.SG.INDEF and horse-ABS.GOV.SG.INDEF see-IND-PST-PL
The man saw a cow, a sheep, and a horse.

Contrary to the ergative-absolutive case marking of the language, the verbal agreement marking is very much nominative-accusative. For transitive verbs, the subject is the ergative argument and the object is the absolutive argument. For intransitive verbs, the subject is the absolutive argument, and there is no direct object. It should be noted that the verb "to become" is transitive. The copula "to be" is intransitive, but agrees with its subject.

The past tense is used for actions taking place in the past, and generally implies that they are complete. The nonpast tense is used for actions taking place in the present or future, and generally implies that they are still ongoing. The nonpast is unmarked.   

The subjunctive has a variety of uses, but only two are relevant for this text. First, all verbs in clauses headed by din are subjunctive. Second, the subjunctive can be used in a main clause to express a wish, hope, or desire. The indicative is used elsewhere. 

Šuḫa sammayu. 
šuḫa sammay-u 
PROX rain-IND 
It is raining/It's going to rain.  

Sē din šuḫa sammēwa diniddōḥičmin. 
sē din šuḫa sammay-iwa dinidda-u-ḥič-mi-n 
1s SUB PROX rain-SJV believe-IND-DPs-SG-DEF 
I think it's raining/I think it's going to rain.

Šuḫa sammēwa! 
šuḫa sammay-iwa 
PROX rain-SJV 
May/Let it rain!

Verbs also have four non-finite forms: two participles and two gerunds, one for each tense. Participles can function like adjectives or nouns, while gerunds are almost always treated as nouns. These are frequently used for derivational purposes, and such instances will simply be listed in the glossary. However, a few constructions making use of these non-finite forms will be discussed here.

The following non-finite verb suffixes are relevant here: 
-ḫēr-: past participle
-nē-: nonpast gerund

These suffixes are attached to verb roots and are followed by nominal endings. The past participles of transitive verbs often have passive meanings.

The arguments of a non-finite verb can be reintroduced as possessors. When both objects of a non-finite transitive verb are expressed as possessors before it, the subject comes first. In such cases, while the non-finite verb will be in the construct state, as it is possessed, the object will not be, because even though it follows a possessor, the subject, it is not possessed by it. 

Sē šulayyin wiluḥičmin. 
sē šula-iyin wil-u-ḥič-mi-n
1s man-ABS.GOV.SG.DEF see-IND-DPs-SG-DEF
I see the man.

sayyas šulāyant wilnēywēn
sayyas šula-ayant wil-nē-iwēn
1s.POSS man-GEN.GOV.SG.DEF see-NPST.GER-ABS.CONST.SG.DEF
my seeing/sight/vision of the man

Din sē ḥun jadwaḥičmin lib-wuffusulam lōs-sē yēwu.
din sē ḥun jad-iwa-ḥič-mi-n lib=wuffusul-am lōˀ=sē yē-u
SUB 1s 3s eat-SJV-DPs-SG-DEF as=necessity-ERG.GOV.SG.INDEF with=1s be-IND
I must eat it/I have to eat it/It's necessary that I eat it.

Ḥunyas jadnēywēn lib-wuffusulam lōs-sē yēwu.
ḥunyas jad-nē-iwēn lib=wuffusul-am lōˀ=sē yē-u
3s.POSS eat-NPST.GER-ABS.CONST.SG.DEF as=necessity-ERG.GOV.SG.INDEF with=1s be-IND
Eating it is necessary for me/It's necessary that I eat it.

Note also the following constructions:

fiš-ulčiḫērēnt yēnēwulun
fiš=ulči-ḫēr-ayant yē-nē-ulun
at=watch-PST.PART-GEN.GOV.SG.DEF be-NPST.GER-ERG.CONST.SG.DEF
while being watched

Sē yarḫērēnt yēnēywēn buludōḥičmin.
sē yar-ḫēr-ayant yē-nē-iwēn buluda-u-ḥič-mi-n
1s touch-PST.PART-GEN.GOV.SG.DEF be-NPST.GER-ABS.CONST.SG.DEF dislike-IND-DPs-SG-DEF
I don't like being touched.