*Nouns*

Alál is a VOS language. It is pro-drop with polypersonal agreement, and is split-ergative.

Nouns are not marked for number or definiteness, but have three cases: agentive, oblique, and patientive. The oblique is used mostly for the objects of adpositions; agentive and patientive nouns correspond to a subject and object for transitive verbs.

Raìr/rár/ruá (AGT/OBL/PAT) are complementizers used to carry case for entire clauses that are the argument of a verb or object of a preposition:

 Kaítlıà mlûkaur.
 He saw the king.

 Kaítlıà ruá : Tızaskaẓálıàx mlúkıur.
 He saw the king abandon me.

 Is·sáh rár : Tızaskaẓálıàx mlúkıur.
 In the night, the king abandoned me.

-----------

*Verbs*

Alál has a lot of verbal morphology, much of which isn't enormously relevant here and has been included in the chart of verb “roots” to make things less of a pain in the neck. Person marking, tense, and other such things are indicated via a series of affixes; in the chart below, the two underscores show where these may be found.

Alignment is fluid-S/active-stative, so it's only ergative sometimes. In this text, for all transitive verbs, all overt subjects are marked as agents and all overt objects as patients. For intransitive verbs, this depends on volition: the subjects of volitive intransitive verbs are in the agentive, while those of involitive verbs are in the patientive. Verb volition is given in the chart below.

All verbs in this text are in the active voice, with one exception. The inverse voice as seen here is marked with the circumfix aì-t. It is passive-like in that it reverses the agent and patient roles within that verb:

 Zaàḷlısta "I took it" vs. Aìzaàḷlıstat "I was taken by it".

The first underscore is where person marking goes. Both agent and patient are marked with a single fused infix on each verb. The persons relevant to this text are given below; note that the intransitive third person singular has three possible forms. Third person is generally assumed to be definite.

*Person Markers*

AGT.PAT
1s	a (intransitive)
1s.3s	aà
1s.3pl	akà
3s	ıı, aı, ıu (intransitive)
3s.1s	ıza
3s.3s	aí
3s.3pl  akì
3pl	ıí (intransitive)
3pl.3s  aír

There is also an infix -záka- meaning "the entirety of (a singular patient)" or "all of (a plural patient)", which follows the person infix.

The next underscore may contain up to three categories of things, applying in the following order:

The first is the negation marker, ìt.

The second is the attributive verb marker. Alál can use fully-conjugated verb forms to modify other words, including nouns (in which case they act like relative clauses) and verbs (in which case they act like adverbs). They must immediately follow whatever they modify. If one is transitive and modifies a noun, that noun is understood as taking the subject place of that verb; to have it play the object's role, the inverse voice must be used. The attributive marker differs depending on the verb, so they're given in the verb table. Essentially, consider any verb with this marker to be some sort of modifier for the preceding word.

The third are "axis" markers, of which there can be multiple for any given verb, which encode a variety of inflectional and derivational things. These three are the only ones you will need to worry about; many are lexicalized and have already been included in the roots table:

aka	motion up towards (something)
lı	past tense (non-recent)
u	deontic modal, either an optative (in 1st/3rd person) or imperative (in 2nd person)

-----------

*Adpositions*

Adpositional constructions are discontinuous. The adposition goes before the modified noun or verb, visually separated by an interpunct (·), with its object coming after. Thus, "I sleep under a tree" becomes "under·sleep<1s> tree.OBL".

The object is always in the oblique case, and may itself be modified by another adpositional phrase, which has the same structure: "I sleep under a tree near a river" thus becomes "under-sleep<1s> near-tree.OBL river.OBL".

Code: Select all

during		ıs
along, atop	akàra
similar to	âẓa
possession	xa, za

Possession is expressed using the same construction: "xa/za·(possessee) (possessor)", with the possessor in the oblique, e.g. "za·laku mlúkur" "the road of (built by) the king".

-----------

*Additional Notes*

    lı·mas is a set phrase meaning something like "then, and then, after that"
    Vowel sequences such as á(C)à will frequently become â(C)a, and à(C)á will become ǎ(C)a; this is true for all vowels, and the vowels need not be the same, so ùí will become ǔı.
    Verbs are always capitalized. Attributive verbs are not.
    A colon (:) is used to mark certain prosodic boundaries, such as between raìr/rár/ruá and the clauses introduced by them, but may also join two related complete clauses that happen sequentially. You may take them as periods, or as "and".