0. Typology
Dánıdoo is a polysynthetic language with complex verb morphology and
relatively simple nominal morphology. It is Nom-Acc in alignment. Word
order is relatively free but subjects normally precede objects.

1. Phonology
The Dánıdoo syllable is maximally CVVC. The sequences gy gw ky kw hw
sh represent single phonemes for the purposes of phonotactics. Onset h is
written x after a coda consonant in the preceding syllable.
Morphophonological processes relevant to the text are listed here. There are
two sets of processes.
The first set applies universally at all morpheme boundaries. They are
presented in the order they are applied in:
úhu → úu / C_C, C_#
úCuCú → úCúCú
Uí → Uyí
Uó → Uwó
oe → owe
uú → úú
w → Ø / $C_U°
y → Ø / $C_U'
w → Ø / #_U°
y → Ø / #_{ı í}
l → n / _n
n → m / _{p b m}
n → l / _l
C1C1 → C1
h → sh / ı_C, ı_#
The second set applies only at the following morpheme boundaries:
1. Before the plural suffix.
2. At the boundary between the constituents of a noun-noun compound
3. At the boundary between a classifier and a verb stem.
4. At the boundary between two directional verb prefixes.5. At the boundary between an incorporated noun and a directional verb
prefix.
The changes are as follows:
Ø → ’ / C$_ú
y w → gy gw / C$_U
y → d / C$_ı *
w → x / C$_ **
* This rule applies only to the perfective stem of derivatives of the verb root yo
- to see.
** This rule only applies to stems of the verb wó - to hold.
Note that the second set of sound changes is applied before the first set.
Key to notation used in this section:
U = any vowel
U° = any back vowel {o ó}
U' = any front vowel {e é ı í}
u = any low-tone vowel
ú = any high-tone vowel
$ = syllable boundary
# = word boundary
Note that clitics are ignored when applying sound changes.

2. Nominal Morphology
Nouns in Dánıdoo are classified according to animacy, noun class and
possession. There is no case marking.

2.1. Animacy
Nouns in Dánıdoo are either animate or inanimate. Animate nouns include all
sapients (humans, gods, spirits), most animals, and some nouns indicating
natural phenomena (sun, wind, etc.). All other nouns are inanimate. Animacy
is indicated for all nouns in the glossary. Animacy affects the choice of
agreement markers on verbs.

2.2. Noun Class and Number
Number marking is determined by class. The following noun classes are
relevant to the text:Normal nouns are countable nouns that are unmarked in the singular. They
form the plural with the suffix -we.
Collective nouns are countable nouns that are unmarked in the plural. These
nouns can take a singulative prefix to form the singular number. No
singulative prefixes occur in the text. Unmarked collective nouns take plural
agreement on verbs.
Mass nouns are uncountable nouns; they are undefined for number.
Nevertheless, they take singular agreement on verbs.

2.3. Possession
Possession is marked by prefixes indicating the person (and number in the
case of first-person possessors) of the possessor. The prefixes are as follows.:
Vowels in brackets surface before a following morpheme starting in a
consonant.

2.4. Noun Compounds
Two nouns can form a compound, written as one word. In such compounds,
the second noun defines the first noun. A compound noun can in turn be the
constituent of a further compound.

2.5. Demonstratives
Demonstratives in Dánıdoo are circumfixes.
Proximal: híí X-níí
Distal: hoo X-noo
1sg g(ı)-
1pl t(ı)-
3anim o-
3inan e

3. Verbal Morphology
Dánıdoo verbs are characterised by aspectual marking on the verb stem, voice
and valency expressed through verbal classifiers, polypersonal agreement,
directional prefixes, and noun incorporation.

3.1. The Verb Template
The morphemes forming a Dánıdoo verb are ordered according to the
following template:
IncorpNoun-[Obj-Directional]-[Obj-Serial]-[Plural-Sbj]-Cl-Stem

3.2. Verb Roots and Stem Sets
Each verb in the glossary is presented as a set of three forms, e.g. yo - yoo -
yín. These three forms are the habitual/stative stem (yo), continuous stem
(yoo), and perfective stem (yín), respectively. Different stems combine with
different subject marking prefixes to indicate the aspect of the verb.

3.3. Classifiers
The stem can be preceded by a classifier that can alter the valency, voice, and
even the meaning of the stem. The following classifiers occur
ísh is a causative classifier and increases the valency if a verb by one, e.g go →
cause s.o. to go, be beautiful → make sth. beautiful/beautify.
ín is an inchoative classifier mostly used with stative verbs, e.g. be beautiful
→ become beautiful.
ón is a classifier with several meanings. It normally indicates that the agent
and the patient of the verb are the same. It is thus used with reflexive verbs.
Many verbs with this classifier have idiomatic meanings.
ól is a classifier that is used to decrease the valency of a verb by one. Direct
objects are not permitted with this classifier, but objects of directional
prefixes are. Many verbs with this classifier have idiomatic meanings.
Classifier-stem combinations with idiomatic meanings not directly inferable
from the above are listed in the glossary under the main heading of the verb.

3.4. Subject Marking
Imperfective subject markers are used with habitual and continuous stems,
while perfective stems use a separate set.
For stems without a classifier, the subject markers are as follows:
Subject markers combine with the í vowel of a classifier or verb stem as
follows:
Subject markers combine with the ó vowel of a classifier or verb stem as
follows:
If the subject is plural and not first person, a plural prefix precedes the subject
marker. The plural prefix is nı word-initially, n otherwise. Furthermore, the
plural prefix combines with the third person subject prefixes as follows:
Imperfective Perfective
1sg gí- gee-
1pl tí- tee-
3sg/pl í- yaaLOC kí- keeREL ga- gaImperfective Perfective
1sg gíí- geyíí-
1pl tíí- teyíí-
3sg/pl íí- yíí-
LOC kíí- keyíí-
REL gáí- gáí-
Imperfective Perfective
1sg góó- gewóó-
1pl tóó- tewóó-
3sg/pl óó- wóó-
LOC kóó- kıwóó-
REL gáó- gáó-nı + í → ní
nı + yaa → nıı
The LOC subject marker is used when the subject of the verb is a location or a
situation. For instance, compare ínáó - “it (= an object) is cold” vs kínáó - “it
(= the weather) is cold”.
The REL subject marker will be discussed in the section on forming relative
clauses.

3.5. Object Marking
The object markers are identical to the possessive markers marked on nouns.
They come before the subject markers or the plural marker. Number of
objects is not obligatorily marked. However, the serial marker hıh can be
used to indicate that the action is applied to a number of objects, serially one
after another. The serial comes after object markers before the subject
markers.
The same set of object markers can also be used in front of a directional
prefix. The serial marker can also apply to the object of a directional prefix,
but it stays in the object slot of the template.

3.6. Directional Prefixes
Directional prefixes serve to specify the spatial (and sometimes temporal)
direction and extension of the action of the verb. The following directional
prefixes are common:
aats(a)- away, off
am(a)- onto, over
dá- open
dé- out of large space (house, forest, etc.); out of its own accord; out
horizontally
én- out of container; out vertically
éné- to exhaustion, until used up
een- around, encircling
goo- along (road, route, defined path)
nen- forward, onwards
néı- together
otsóó- apart, asunder (of breaking things)
sá- away, out of sight
s(ı)- into
tót(a)- in two
wıh- across, around; over an indefinite distancewool- above, over, from above
yá- towards, at
yíts(ı)- against
When directional markers combine with stems to yield idiomatic meanings,
these are listed in the glossary under the main heading of the verb.

3.7. Incorporated Nouns
A noun can be incorporated at the very front of the verb complex. The noun
cannot take any number marking. Commonly incorporated nouns include
body parts and tools. Incorporated body parts can either indicate the body
part affected or the body part employed in the action of the verb. When
incorporated nouns are used to form verbs with an idiomatic meaning, these
are listed in the glossary.

3.8. Note on Aspect and Tense
Dánıdoo does not overtly mark tense. However, the perfective is often
interpreted as indicating past events as it marks an action considered in its
entirety and therefore normally completed. Nevertheless, it must be noted
that ongoing activities in the past are necessarily indicated using the
continuous conjugation. In storytelling, the word kítoh “it is/was so” is often
specifically used to indicate that descriptive sentences refer to past time.

4. Attributives and Relative Clauses
Dánıdoo does not have a separate class of adjectives. Instead stative verbs are
used. To express adjectival notions attributively, the habitual/stative stem of
the verb is used with the relative subject marker ga.
Relative clauses are formed in the same way, with ga filling the subject or
object slot as required. All other elements of the verb complex are retained as
needed.

5. Adverbial Clauses
An adverbial clause can be formed by removing the subject marker in the verb
complex and prefixing h(e) to it. This adverbial clause can be used to indicate
the manner in which an action is performed (“Smiling, he left”), or to indicate
simultaneous action (“He walked along whistling a tune”).

6. Adverbs
The continuous and perfective stems of stative verbs can be used on their own
to form adverbs. The choice of the perfective stem adds a sense of urgency to
the meaning of the adverb. Such adverbs are often reduplicated, sometimes
accompanied by tone change on the second instance of the adverb. This does
not significantly alter the meaning.

7. Subordinate Clauses
A transitive verb can take a whole sentence as its object using the
complementiser dee. The object slot on the verb is left empty. Word order is
verb + dee + subordinate clause.