General
Dilmunidic has very little morphology, being largely analytic. Word-order is strongly SVO. All adjectives and modifiers follow the head noun.

Many words can change part-of-speech by zero derivation, e.g.:

šegkum	‘to be hot’ as a stative verb
‘hot’ as an adjective
‘to heat up’ as a causative verb


Active and Stative Verbs
A main distinction is that of ACTIVE and STATIVE verbs, which is enconded either in the subject pronouns or a post-noun phrase clitic chain. These clitics always appear as the final element of a noun-phrase.

Objects always use the stative forms.

Active marking is characterised by pronouns and clitics containing the vowel <e>.
Similar, Stative marking by <a>. Pronouns are commonly attached directly to the verb. (All pronouns present in the text can be found in the glossary.)

E.g. <en>	1sg. ACT
<an>	1sg. DYN

Verbs are not obligatorily marked for tense, especially if context makes it clear. Nonetheless, Active verbs are usually considered to have a default past-reference, and stative verbs a default present/progressive reference.

Stative verbs are also used to highlight preconditions of a following clause, or the ‘state’ in which the following clause occurs.

Active verbs may function as stative verbs by simply using the <a> clitics, but stative verbs never take active marking.

Aspect

Active verbs may be marked by the imperfective prefix gi-:

enkala ziz	'I ate bread'
engikala ziz	'I am/was eating bread'

Tense and Mood
Tense and Mood are indicated by particles (mostly deriving from verbs) which precede the subject. When a tense/mood particle is present, pronouns attach to these instead of the verb. The ones present in this text are:

mu a general negative particle
e.g. muen kala ziz	'I did not eat bread'

bar expresses impossibility
e.g. baren kala ziz	'I could not eat bread'

bal	expresses a dynamic change of state, ‘to become’, ‘to become possible’
e.g. balen kala ziz	'I was able to eat bread'

There is also the modal prefix ha- which indicates possibility.
enhakala ziz	'I can/could/might eat bread.'

Possession
Genitive phrases are Possessed – Possessor. The final noun of a genitive phrase is either marked with the genitive suffix
-ak or a possessive pronoun clitic. The only possessive clitic used in this text is -ab, the 3.inan. clitic which does not mark number.

The -ak suffix can also be used to make adjectival phrases and is commonly used to derive nouns. In these cases, adjectival -ak is written attached to the word in question, such as:

lu ugarak	‘man field.GEN’ = farmer

Genitive marking can stack as it must appear as the final element of a noun phrase..

Relative Clauses
Dilmunidic uses a gap strategy exclusively. The subject of a relative clause does not carry any clitic chain. Resumptive pronouns may be used to clear some abiguity.

Ziz enkala(b) a sig	'The bread (which) I ate (it) (was) nice'

Demonstratives and Plurals
Demonstratives form part of the clitic chain and appear before plural marking. Plurals are marked by -el/al.

The only one present in this text is:

era that (distal).STAT

Zero Copula
Dilmunidic uses a zero-copula with the subject taking stative marking.

an lu 1sg.STAT man ‘I am a man’
lu a gullaš man STAT chief ‘The man is a chief’

Reduplication
Reduplication has many functions. For colours, it indicates a less intense form.

bar 'white'
barbar 'whiteish, off-white, grey'

In many instances, reduplicated forms are best considered lexicalised and have been included in the glossary.