Ðe se ponen a plaç meg ny rout, graðleur e donaçon rovant.|They were standing in the street asking for money and volunteers.
Y graðleur porçonaurn y mansc seyon coglt pall'eç joun orphan.|The volunteers shared the food they had collected with the orphans here.
Ayent dou cougl W e X, un porçonment dy som W + X nommau nos un mission m ant font W e bers X ða casc porçon toc X cos unic.|Given two sets W and X, a partition of the sum W + X is called a function m with source W and target X if each part intersects W exactly once.
Y justiçour absoloirn my grandmaðr poll'ig delit a blasmant.|The judges found my grandmother innocent of blasphemy.
Nos eu l'oc annað dou tort dell'ivan apportað; stoven torrir ag casc aldr!|We've brought two Christmas pies this year - both my parents wanted to bake!
Ðe voun calscon fallent fair por l'oc bors scholer cavir.|They will do whatever it takes to get this grant.
Y concegl surmettraun jamay ty messarf periglous d'œculux bressem.|The committee will never condone your dangerous misuse of ionising radiation.
Vail un bon trenc, lour dar un jorn cogmað lon cost.|It would be nice to give them a day off for free.
Ða meðes nos poðau lou fornir d'aïðanç, ðe trocausn noc entr tardessem.|Even if we provided them with aid, they would not reciprocate later.
J'oyeu ne Horð ðe pascn for bakilau.|I heard that in Horth they only eat cod.
Nos voum partir je Maucr, donc toð je Mart faldra banfoy quïr.|We'll leave on Wednesday, so we need all Tuesday to pack.
Nien va par un bricot nuçal lour rovant, com i fay rastel!|There's no point asking him for a wedding present, he's so miserly!
A Portingal fo un method novel, ant carn aromað ne saus de scitom pisað.|In Portingale there was a new recipe, with spiced meat in a tomato sauce.
Y soldart eð y barvier vencoirn y dragon e soulor allagr vescoirn ðe.|The soldier and the shepherdess killed the dragon and lived happily ever after.
Rey Ambrosc commandau casc vascel port frugt sandrin, ma faloy moneð demay.|King Ambrose required each ship to carry citrus fruits, but the cost was too high.
Infeliç, my sour poð noc boleð pascr, dec i lou support noc.|Unfortunately, my sister cannot eat mushrooms as she is intolerant.
Ah, j'ay formig me caut – jo seray dormið sull'oc braç!|Ow, I've got pins and needles – I must have slept on my arm!
Cossy asseïr sull'ig caðer no sera scur quemant.|Surely sitting on the chair like that is uncomfortable.
Stou y Duc coy l'eç nohas parmy sull'administration d'autortað may accarr.|The Duke must stop the right-wing in his regime gaining more influence.
Ðe parmettoirn nos entraum siemprað.|They cheerfully let us come in.
Jo vel for un corrovað me nommar, mathem partenent.|I'd only consider myself an amateur when it comes to maths.
Jan es desamoraçandessem; alor i's luy y courstravay accommettent.|John is more likely to fall out of love, so he's the one having an affair.
Sy maðr creye ig sy desir escapat sceus le coïr d'un marið trovar.|Her mother believed her wanderlust might stop her finding a husband.
Jusc oy, Rom foy prohibið ig taisson sein pasct durant Caresm.|Hitherto, Rome had banned badger from being eaten in Lent.
Vos orreð viol cemtir moutessem, com dit, all'hour pre y lugnt.|They say you will most often hear the graveyard fiddles the hour before dawn.
Jo te pieð, dig en mey nien – jo n'ay deja y cart trevold leit dell'oc cougl.|Please don't tell me anything – I've not yet read the fourth book in the series.
Scan noc y jonnovar zucarrað ancour – nos despardreu eç fam.|Don't bring out the candied butterflies yet – we'll ruin our appetites.
Y preu osc borallesc dy Grant Morenç a 1519 fis loy ne Damvað a mesur dy neyanç vert.|The first Borlish victim of the 1519 Great Dying was in Damvað during the green snowfall.
Jo dorme prell'hour un; nos ayau tout stif jacent dy Fest Reveglon.|I was asleep before one; we were all sleepily stuffed from the Christmas meal.
Nos som jeunant y jorn, ma colluïsc mey a masquet pos occas vars un grant quelt.|We're fasting during the day, but come with me to mosque after sunset for a big dinner.
Y kenonaut vil casc meis volar retrasiscent entr y Tar eð y Lun.|The spaceship will fly back and forth between the Earth and the Moon each month.
Nos s'usareu l'ignifex posc y kenonaut arra dou gyr may complið.|We will run out of oxygen when the ship has completed two more orbits.
A tu lour y derran disq a CMM oïð: "Soll'Autr Stel"?|Have you heard their latest record "Beneath New Stars"?
Jo soccos my jacquot avant y foyer ne spien i sechisceus un pog.|I shook my coat in front of the fire so that it might dry out a bit.
I vos menara an japot ny mur oyon j'ay un livr scos.|He will take you to a gap in the wall where I have hidden a book.
L'oc arbr es crous dec l'a un coup fourraç caut.|This tree is hollow because it's been struck by lightning.
Y vain ag scuir stan sancant posc nos laiscaurn y traf n'eramn.|The boy's wrists were bloody when we took off his handcuffs.
Ag tarm dy rout, tras un pont sur y Barraut, yað y megl tarn n'Istr Boral.|At the end of the road, across a Barraut bridge, there's the best inn in Borland.
Y grant atelier sta un tapeçment de laboriostur; compagn agen a casc tabr.|The great workshop was a hive of industry, journeymen working a every table.
J'ay magn farvour de te veir com y pardent.|I'm very much looking forward to seeing you lose.
Com instroið vos l'eç studiant n'alcun gournanç ayent nell'oc schol?|How can you teach these students if the school has no control over them?
Jo vent for pisment y reloðessem, ne jast e n'eramn.|I sell only the finest clockwork, made of zinc or bronze.
Ðe dimeyaurn tras y moð coll'atonal abject de combat lou cercondant.|They crawled through the mud with the terrible discord of battle around them.
Gent parten dell'area aç seðel; y derran parform dy jorn vendra de cessar.|People were leaving the theatre in droves; the last show must have just finished.
Jo peðeu aïðanç dell'instroyour, ma i spallaçau ne nien dignt.|I asked the instructor for help, but he shrugged and said nothing.
Y cat ac veunt am particuler y ci remorcour ennoyar ny campaner.|The cat that lives here especially likes to annoy the ringers in the belltower.
Nos fayau l'eç jognt entr y clojon, apart vijon dy majon.|We would meet betwen the hedgerows, out of sight of the house.
Un figleç com saccaçour n'aye, mean calscon, l'apprestað all'oc foudoir.|A childhood of housebreaking had not, somehow, prepared him for this clusterfuck.
I beyeu caffay aðief je Lun por un centuir fair svanir.|He had enough coffee on Monday to knock out an army.
"Jo vos ableg dell'oc païs," dis y duc, me visant con sull'arbalest.|"I banish you from these lands," said the duke, aiming his crossbow at me.
Y carpenter partojau plusour forað nell'ardois.|The carpenter bored several holes into the board.
Y scon hagraç foy scartellað par un hombeul abject.|The boatswain's mate was torn apart by a terrible beast.
Com os tu suggerir ig jo so ja descont pre minogt?|How dare you suggest I have ever gone to bed before midnight?
Jo pieð ig vostrell'ivan foln noc mell'ongr a pie.|I ask that your children don't step on my toes.
Ðe saven noc ig balen son comportandessem a ongulað.|They didn't know that whales were most closely related to ungulates.
Un ellips es y form traçað n'un cort boucr a dou nagl vardað tis.|An ellipse is the shape made by a pen in a taut loop attached to two pegs.
Y lagç onyx con saus a kes er collüið de bou aromað.|The scallop pasta in cheese sauce came with spiced beef.
Y ci annað seyon fait sur mar, i fruya soul parmy toð y cordamn.|While he was away at sea, he would dance around in the rigging.
Y fugnt posc y rouvaç valois fort ig un hom parmy connois parolar ne teudesc.|The getaway after the heist would have gone better, had any of them spoken Dutch.
Fal jo t'instroy l'enter fondamen, pre tu attent uncos novel.|I must teach you the basics before you try something new.
Y fondamen corpore n'aug son aquifex eð ignifex.|The elements found in water are hydrogen and oxygen.
Y roum enter au fler a cendr eð acier e cogr.|The whole space smelt of ash and steel and leather.
Nos vasm tras y camp, genoil dessou parmy sauð e lour agnel.|We crossed the field, knee-deep in ewes and their lambs.
Nossy nuçal ant regnbou doblað ny ciel sta un cainç a ney d'aost.|Our wedding having a double rainbow in the sky was a happy coincidence.
My ci fraðr e mey tegnsm toð my camis ne roug fosc.|With my brothers I dyed all my shirts dark red.
Un mission sevrant sevr y sunt; y ci destegnt accaçað a destegnt.|An injective function separates; distinct inputs are sent to distinct outputs.
Con y fin dell'ig parform l'er senglottant ingournað.|By the end of the play he was sobbing uncontrollably.
Y couð sevr y spig sial a çaf eð a farin.|The millstone separates the rye into chaff and flour.
Ðe figuran ig tu vel l'aïðanç benoçar.|They thought you could use the help.
Robað pall'accostur prestral, Nicol me rannuðau com saluð ne passant.|Clad in his clergy robes, Nicholas nodded to me in greeting as he passed.
L'enclina sy quil por y caf se pon pieç polç dessur.|He would tilt the head of his bed up a couple of inches.
Nos parsoloim y quelt e laiscaum un affis munfiant.|We paid for our dinner and left a generous tip.
Jo vil un astuç te dar ða ja tu saf noc cal fair.|I'll give you a hint if you ever don't know what to do.
I splendisceu dy paið an port closið ag strem dy colloir.|It shone from under a closed door at the end of the hallway.
I t'amau, e l'en sta voud.|He loved you, and he was furious about it.
Vusceu y quen sey raudessem com vos ayað ig declarað.|Let's hope the queen is as delighted as you said she'd be.
Par vec se poð sautellar a Ausçagm con tor dou pavar soul.|You can pop over to Ausçagm by bus for like less than a quid.
Ne spien ðe dinn noc kestant la sey calscon, sy paðr au un majon caut a Londr.|So that they wouldn't be ruined no matter what, his father bought a London house.
Nos faldra y soldart condensar vars l'oc haut forcul.|We will need to concentrate our forces at this mountain pass.
Pos un hom asmuth me dar vars l'assignað?|Could someone direct me to the person in charge?
Toð masq ront a sull'inception con uncos exact equal: y vacil bre a dout.|Every blown cover begins with the exact same thing: the flicker of suspicion.
Thomas poð casc veg oc veir a sy ci ogl, un sclar apen, comoscon un foy allum l'iris d'un cat ne roum assombrið.|Thomas can always see it in their eyes, almost a flash, the way a cat's eyes catch the light in a dark room.
Parveg Thomas se ren delicat aðief a scapar ag dalr doutous.|Sometimes Thomas can charm his way out of the pit of doubt.
Autr veg, com l'oc noit, i saf luy valois raut fugr tostessem ant ancour l'occasion.|Other times, like tonight, he knows he should have bolted when he had the chance.
Y vacil a se tramutað ne scoul, e degnant ig i beut sy douç explanation, eð ig i coul nell'aucoum deur vijon, ja saf i l'es tart demay.|The flicker has turned to a glare, and although he valiantly makes his excuses and slips away into the crowd, he knows it's already too late.
Corf son aucel reusant, noc confiabr com reilot.|Ravens are cunning birds, not as trustworthy as wrens.
Jo figur tu a uncos dit tor captant; jo contende noc tan.|I imagine you said something interesting; I wasn't paying attention.
Attendr a y perigl ac vos communeyar es enter inutr.|It's useless to try and get you to see how dangerous this is.
Y remarcabr es ig tu survescoy e no fo igne.|The important thing is you're alive and not on fire.
Y ci ogl a Luc Osgaut vain cos sot tras y lumner nievrous all'oc fest.|Lucas Osgood's eyes are soft and foolish in the gauze-light at the party.
Ac afont cay sombr, plen d'ombr, e calt demay comoscon - alor jamay broucau jo allagr un jalicq portant.|It's dim in here - shadowy - and a trifle too warm, but then I never did like wearing a jalick suit.
La no m'es colour aðief.|Not enough colour for me.
L'es segr magnfiant, ant visaç lon alcun cur l'oc jorn toð cas; ne spiant exact vos porreð y ci folt veir a cost de sull'ogl, un lign entaccant veir sy laur parlocant.|He's a handsome man, face unlined by cares, at least tonight - if you look close you can see the creases at the corners of his eyes, the slight mar of a line on either side of his lips.
Y soury dað es idiot cos minutious.|His smile is carefully stupid.
Ma j'ay lontemp zest aut, ig Luc Osgaut a dou character sevrað.|But I've suspected for a long time that Lucas Osgood is two people.
Frequent es i y fol avant l'aucoum eð un scandal jacquottað, ma Osgaut Corporal es parfait gournað e profit faint demay por no star for y molin moneð prement y við a libertin soutenent.|He's been a fool in public and a scandal often enough, but Osgood Corporal is too tightly-run, too profitable to be the money-making machine that feeds a libertine's habits.
Sey l'a astuçour y starchessem acatabr ja raðunað - l'a vray Agatha Rat, bempart valent ne bon mont - ben l'idiocy e masq.|Either he has the best advisors any man ever assembled - he does have Agatha Ratte, which ought to count for a lot - or the stupidity is a mask.
Por ig me pon jo ac, or.|Which is why I'm here, really.
Alcun hom sceurn jamay Osgaut faucar - alcun hom a y lacq idiot penetrað dessou.|Nobody's ever been able to crack Osgood – nobody's gotten under the idiot lacker.
Parcanç la no's nien a trovar, l'oc es fort plausibr.|There might be nothing underneath, for all we know.
Me parisc attendr es prouf dy soldart por collocquour ne Vanda, ma mey jo so pavr a Arcady, eð ac ageu nos un pog different.|I suspect it's a rite of passage for Vandham reporters, but I'm an Arcadian boy, and we do things a little differently here.
Brutal a bas, ne meyan certan toð cas.|Less brutally, at least in some ways.
E jo so magn feliç, jo crey.|And my luck is very good, I think.
L'es segr spart ma n'a alcun experiç de tact ben poliðeç.|He's a smart man, but he's got no diplomatic experience.
Sevent vos posseð vayar lontan aðief por plu savir repaðrir.|Next time you might wander so far that you can't get back.
Jo vis un hom aye un fold ag cogn mis d'un fougl a mi plaç pall'oc trevold.|I saw someone had folded over the corner of a page halfway through the book.
Nos entraum ne Rhodos najant, y grant pigl eramn nos parlocant.|We sailed into Rhodes, the great bronze legs on either side of us.
Sy motif minutious por ig scapar fo fragnt!|Her elaborate escape plan had been ruined!
Ðe aurn zest poðir y gost aðelir ne zest oranç addar.|They believed adding orange zest would improve the taste.
Y cainç dy semman sevent es nossy prou dy soldart.|The events of the next week are our rite of passage.
Veint annað eld, i hamtau ne Cordoba e denoy collocquour.|At twenty, he settled down in Cordoba and became a journalist.
Sy respos sta monoton e machinal, ogl fis a paið.|His reply was monotone and automatic, eyes downturned.
I resgardau e vis y tarnour ponent e calm a cost y sougl.|He looked back and saw the innkeeper standing still by the door.
Y livrer a Rout Hawthorn sta segr formous parcanç trent annað eld, eð y preu veg oyon Frederick l'encontrau, un crevoscr preuç ny stað de 1755, ja l'au (a mesur de raut rouðar con sy sour) dou vertað appris dy segr: y primer, ig i vende livr d'un qualtað hautessem e noc obstroint un preç boncoppessem a toð hom autr ne Sowbruck, ben Londr meðes, ma parisce a sgart calscon soutenuð cos immachiabr com casc vocationnað dy muncef (degnant ig lonc y mont sy seut majon fosn picq); y doussem, ig i sperisce par ci jorn plusour con prevart magr e fort men por explanation.|The bookseller of Hawthorn Street was a handsome man of perhaps thirty years, and the first time Frederick met him, on a balmy summer evening in 1755, he had (by dint of some quick gossip with his sister) learnt two things about the man: first, he sold books of a higher quality and a lower price than anyone else in Sowbruck, or maybe even all of London, and yet always seemed as impeccably maintained as any professional in the borough (despite the reportedly small size of his household); and second, he would vanish for days at a time with little warning and still less in the way of excuses.
Casc bel veðry voscon forgað m'animaraun com y primer.|All your beautiful pieces of glasswork will excite me like the first.
I se leyau un sorcegl e s'appis contr y mur.|She raised an eyebrow and leant against the wall.
I pos vos souprendr ig vray j'occis noc.|It may surprise you to learn that I'm not dead.
La remane for eç fougl frossað sur y tabr.|There were only some crumpled sheets left on the table.
Marc cossirau ða luy val sortir.|Mark considered walking out.
All'oc pognt i cogleu y bottel avant David ne sy man, e le sarveu por y veðr noc-a-vin emplir avant luy meðes.|Instead he picked up the bottle in front of David and used it to fill the empty not-a-wine-glass in front of him.
David se leyau un sorcegl.|David's eyebrow lifted.
"Jo save noc alcohol te toc."|"I didn't know alcohol affected you."
"I le fay noc," respos Marc n'engolliscent con gourf lað dy vin.|"It doesn't," Mark answered and took a hearty mouthful of the wine.
"Pu parveg j'am fort en parformar."|"But sometimes I like to pretend."
Un ricot.|A laugh.
Bas, e sincer cos souprendent.|Low and surprisingly earnest.
"Ða tu desir en parformar, beu lentessem, fros un pog ty laur, figur tu osc y gost, ma noc tan com tu l'ador."|"If you want to pretend, drink slower, pucker your lips a little, pretend you hate the taste, but not as much as you love it."
"Lonc ty parol tu en a experiç."|"You sound like you speak from experience."
"Oc, jo so dou man por m'eurar faus," promis David.|"I am an expert on pretending to get drunk," David promised.
"Par outr, cos allagr, jo so tan dou man por m'eurar ne realtað."|"And, as it happens, I am also an expert on getting drunk."
Y ci aldr ern partið, donc nos nos euraum un pog, jo figur.|The parents were out so we all got a bit drunk, I suppose.
Par outr jo cossir ig Carthag sey a destroir.|Furthermore, I claim that Carthage must be destroyed.
Nascra l'ivan tost aðief por jo vel y melle rassistr l'oc saçon?|Shall the baby arrive soon enough that I might rejoin society this season?
Faldra noðriç a Manuel tandic nos faim melle a Cordin.|Manuel will need a nanny while we spend the season in Cordin.
Scey ja un hom ny hal a pascr all'hour oyon Claudia vien entarn – Victoria, arrancað parfait ne sy curtel a scarlat, tag beint tandic y magð met y tabr.|There is someone already in the dinehall when Claudia enters – Victoria, perfectly arranged in her scarlet red robe, drinking tea while the maid sets the table.
L'oc no's sigt rar – vray, y Tarner de Perla Solare accar moutessem ag majortað y villa Condottore, preseyent confiabr un dy colluïsc moneð premendessem ne Fontanelli.|It's not an unusual sight – the Hostess of Perla Solare is one of the more common visitors to the Condottore villa, being responsible for the most successful business in Fontanelli.
Ma cos usual l'ig accar ag ralley, noc ag cocoro dell'aubon.|But usually she should rather visit later in the afternoon, not first thing in the morn.
Com y bempart de sull'armað, Victoria faïsc y stel colluïr por tout – ig inclus sy sveilanç.|Like most in her employ, Victoria generally keeps late hours in all things – including when she gets up.
Claudia beut y bonjorn ag domn antir eð y basc a cost n'approismant.|Claudia greets the older woman and goes to give her a kiss on the cheek.
"Vos eð vos smars tost, Tarner.|"You're under the sun early, Hostess.
Jo sper ig nien se produg gra."|I hope there is nothing grave."
"Diabr, cas ig jo volois vossy port martellar – noc, alcun production tan gra.|"Oh, I should have been besieging your door if it were – no, not as grave as all that.
Bonjorn, Domn," dig Victoria ne souriant.|Good morning, my lady," Victoria says, smiling.
"L'un de my doncel er tart vant, e detectau uncos ne repaðrent la vos desirareð, lonc mey, apprendr hastous."|"One of my girls was about late, and she spotted something on her way home which I thought you should like to know post-haste."
"Por tant, noc un production tan gra?|"And yet it's not as grave as all that?
Alor certan vos sceust un doncel m'accaçar coll'eç novel?" rou Claudia, asseyent eð y magð ablegant cant i cour le sarvir.|Then surely you could have sent one of your girls to tell me?" Claudia asks, taking a seat and waving off the maid who rushes to serve her.
"Jo sta toð cas deur quelt, e creye uncos luxuir benoçar," dig Victoria cos conjuraçonnant, sy cop leyant.|"I was up anyway, and I thought I could use a little luxury," Victoria says, a little conspiratorially, and lifts her teacup.
"Parcanç un bris meðes d'entrig.|"And perhaps a spot of gossip.
Oc a digr, Annetta vis un monc entrant ag bourg."|You see, Annetta saw a monk entering the town."
Ig, Claudia paus.|Claudia pauses at that.
"Un monc," dobr i un pog souvars, contr ig Victoria soury con gien fossettant.|"A monk," she repeats, somewhat incredulous, while Victoria grins, her cheeks dimpling.
"Ac?"|"Here?"
L'oc noðriç foudent es nostrell'ivan addocent ne lengaç foran eð a diabr!|The damn new nanny is teaching our child foreign and Satanic languages!
Sy dou magð le parlocaurn, l'amenant ag scrittoir dy sanat.|Her two maids shepherded her towards the doctor's office.
Nien souprendent ig svaniscn y sartour – y segr parisc star smars des un portrait d'Ascenenç, ant visaç angost e tan nobr, formous indeniabr.|No wonder the seamstresses swoon – the man looks like something out of Ascendancy painting, his face thin, but noble and undeniably handsome.
Sull'ogl lugn com brant n'ombr, sy visaç enter accendent, e se renn fragnendessem meðes coll'ig stovr a sy menton e sy laur haut.|His eyes are glimmering embers in shadow, lightening his whole face, and are made all the more striking by the stubble on his chin and upper lip.
E le volopn eç symbol de castað pur.|And he is swathed in symbols of chastity.
Habit a monc, cavel cort ne boucr a sy tempr.|Monk's habit, short hair curling at his temples.
L'eç rob seyon portað son grant demay toð plen de sostr, frossað a cegntur con un cort blanc novað – eð a cost dy ci tarm ragottið pen un armilla, lugnt sou rayon.|The robes he wears are too large and abundant in fabric, bundled at the waist by a knotted white rope – and by the rope ends an hourchain hangs, gleaming in the sunlight.
"J'ay magn oïð de vous," dig Todor.|"I have heard much about you," Todor says.
Y hautour ag monc surcont sull'un par test ben may.|The monk is a good head taller than him.
"Eð vos?" rou y monc.|"You have?" the monk asks.
Accis par nimb aurfiað, l'a aer povr, humbr, bel – e prohibið.|Haloed in gold, he looks poor, humble, beautiful – and forbidden.
Todor crey noc uncos attragndessem cossy jamay veir sy við enter.|Todor doesn't think he's ever seen anything so tempting in his life.
Paravant no m'er nien tramis, ma my fraðr antir es oy mort.|I wouldn't inherit anything before, but now my elder brother is dead.
Degnant ig cay noit l'er tout neir portant, ig inclus gant e capel.|Although it was night she wore all black, including her gloves and hat.
Des y piscin smarc jo e le vey se pondr calm.|I get out of the pool and see her standing still.
Nell'oc icon veyað mell'aldr a cost e mey entrig.|In this photo there's my parents on each side and me inbetween.
Entrig cortal produis l'er ablegað soutan ag 1r Octobr 1768.|Court intrigue led to his sudden dismissal on October 1st 1768.
Ricart zoum, lor mort y carn bou.|Richard hums, then bites into the steak.
"Or, y cligs partenent.|"Now, about the church.
Dig mey honest – cal pes tu de Fraðr Desmont?"|Tell me honestly – what do you think of Brother Desmond?"
"Tu es l'en passað con oy, toll'oc bourg son s'en pleitent," remarc Carolin.|"You've spent time with him now, it's the talk of the town," Caroline points out.
"Ne bon mont volois tu noc ci noçon en forgar?|"Shouldn't you have formed your own opinions?
E vray es ig tu landa sy pie, com untal racont des scrittur?"|And did you really wash his feet, like in some story from scripture?"
Fal a Ricart endeutar noc souriar cos presument; a plaç i luy lanç un sgart innocent.|Richard smothers the urge to grin smugly and gives her an innocent look instead.
"I cayeu sy pie nognt," dig i.|"He fell and injured his foot," he says.
"Jo no'r for l'aïðant."|"I was only helping him."
I jovisc, amusað.|She snorts, amused.
"Fort certan no'r tu," murmur i.|"Of course you were," she mutters.
"Oy j'ay l'ig stoir oïð moutessem apen ag racont de sy melacr.|"I've heard that story almost more times now than the story of his miracle.
Veyað y humbr e devouð, y dedeyaðessem es Segr Ricart, saluçon carnt n'act de humiltað.|Oh how humble and pious, how dedicated Sir Richard is, seeking salvation in acts of humility.
Tu me fay scam." Carolin soupir.|You are an embarrassment." Caroline sighs.
"Tu no's jamay hom religious.|"You've never been the religious sort.
Cal es ty conjuraçon?"|What are you plotting?"
"L'a aer d'y bourg aðelir."|"He seems good for the town."
"Casc gent saun ig – alcun hom autr n'a se mis a genoil por luy, malgrað," dig Carolin, e lor parisc i comprendr ig seyon dit.|"Everyone knows that – no one else has gone down on their knees for him, though," Caroline says and then seems to realise what she said.
"Bon Deu, Ricart, vel le deniar."|"Oh Lord, Richard, you didn't."
"Nien n'ay jo fait!" dig Ricart, pre poðir se coïr.|"I haven't!" Richard says, before he can stop himself.
"Pu tu desir," accus Carolin, coll'eç ogl sagaç lor i l'indic con deit.|"But you want to," Caroline accuses, her eyes sharp as she points a finger at him.
"Diabr, Ricart, l'oc segr es monc!|"Good God, Richard, the man is a monk!
Tu va noc – tu va noc un monc sedugr!|You can't – you can't seduce a monk!
Y plurem, noc avant y bourg enter!"|And not in front of the whole town!"
Remane un cavel ag gien dy babe, eð i le deleu a toccot.|A hair remained on the baby's cheek, and he brushed it away.
Jo far bon com deibr, tandic y mont enter es me souvars atorn.|I'm doing as well as can be expected, with the word upended around me.
Jo n'ay deja un segr cullighessem connuð.|I've not yet come across a stranger man.
L'es queint e polið; untal vel jo mariðar pront e direct!|He is charming and polite; I should marry such a man in a heartbeat!
A cal bon un cognit lon masq?|What good is a disguise with no mask?
Vos saveð deïr viker pondr a toll'oc majon des je Lun.|You know you'll have to steward the whole house from Monday.
Jo sgardau vars l'Adriaç ne yaurt a noiç colorn pascent.|I looked out over the Adriatic eating hazelnut yoghurt.
Slognað comoscon ig nos parvendreu allagr-vescoirn-il, jo vil te colluïr.|I will stay by your side, no matter how unlikely it is that we'll get our happy ending.
Nos oyeu ig pas quinan e scanen y scagl tras port.|We could hear footsteps thumping up the stairs outside.
Tonneðr crullau dessur cant Damian hasta vars y tarm vectoir.|Thunder clapped overhead as Damian hurried towards the bus stop.
Fort certan, Onnacra parloc y cascat stoniscendessem novomondin.|Certainly the Onnacra has the most breathtaking waterfall in the New World.
Eð accougl ne cainç Adelait reconnoy l'abject perpetuitað luy jait avant.|And immediately Adelaide understood the terrible infinitude cast out before her.
I poðe parmettr ag Capitan de le pardr sou un ciel xenic calscon, e l'hom denir a coup e cos enter l'istraðessem de jamay.|She could let the Captain lose her under any xenic sky, and become at once and entirely the most isolated person in history.
L'idea attraghen.|The thought appealed.
Ða vos sereð ausnaç demay por fruyar, façað collocq!|If you're too shy to dance, at least talk to somebody!
Cascif vel un hom foudent un desc scadom aromar con narichel issugt?|Why the fuck would anyone put dessicated coconut in a tomato dish?
Sophia connoscent, l'irrompra l'oc fest parlocað de sull'adolant.|Knowing Sophia, she'll make a grand arrival flanked by her sycophants.
Eð vos y japot trovað la y ci vorpeg irromen apar?|Did you find the hole through which those foxes were breaking in?
Toð pris accougl, Marc no'r certan de noc faïr y tuyaut recevir, ma ancour l'oc no sta total extrane.|On balance, Mark wasn't sure that he wouldn't rather have had the cigar, but there was still something in it.
Prefaibr untal aucoum par gent aye lou sgardað e pesað a lour y jorn a cortisment meðes, n'y bel per admirant.|Probably any number of people had looked at them and thought of their own courting days, admiring the handsome couple.
"Vos eð y fest broucað?" rovau Anna, posc ðe aurn ci may follað.|"Did you have a nice time?" Anna asked, once they'd walked a bit more.
"Oc fort, vray," admis i.|"I did, rather," he admitted.
"Dig le noc a alcun hom."|"Don't tell anyone."
Y magð scarneu.|She huffed.
"Jo vos support may cant vos parformað noc star dessur de tout."|"You're more fun to be around if you aren't trying to pretend you're above it all."
I luy dau un sgart fix, e dis sec, "Jo so vray dessur de tout."|He gave her a sardonic look, and said archly, "I am above it all."
"No soð vos," dis i enter serious.|"No you aren't," she said, quite seriously.
"Vos soð paregl com nous autr."|"You're the same as the rest of us."
Vuscau vos ayað bon.|If only that were true.
"Jo promet de noc ig star."|"I'm really not."
I soupirau, pariscent a pognt d'uncos digr, ma se taçoy.|She sighed, seeming about to say something, but chose not to.
Ðe follaurn y sougl kieð; Marc fey verroil ag port ados.|They let themselves in quietly, Mark locking the door behind them.
Candon ðe yemoy la oyon l'eç segr eð eç domn stan a asmuth sevrar—e posc ðe ascuraurn ig Magret e Willaum se parteurn toð idone e con poliðeç maxim—Anna se pos a ortegl e bascau raut, cast, sy gien.|When they reached the place where the men and women went their separate way—and after they'd seen that Daisy and William parted with no funny business—Anna rose up on her toes and quickly, chastely, kissed his cheek.
L'er partið pall'ig scagl domn pre Marc sceus y façon decidr de sy reaction.|She was gone up the women's staircase before Mark had quite decided how to react.
L'oc bourg a recar dy molin a tuyaut; lourell'empley, mendrem.|This town needs the cigar factories, for the jobs if nothing else.
Vos fal seg monð, ben un annað meðes, por cortisment idone.|You need six months, or even a year, for an entirely proper courtship.
Des y platabac pris i dou peutr blau e pos i l'un a sy fraðr.|He took out two mugs from the cupboard and offered one to his brother.
Port un grant capel ben nos te mesverreu nell'aucoum.|Wear a big hat or we won't see you in the crowd.
L'oc commenç con sarf dar a desjeun—y soul repast tojorn pasct cas lou.|It started with serving at breakfast—the one meal that they always took at home.
Poll'ig fale just se pondr a cost y platabac com tas de grant hautour particuler, ma se poðe noc vayar apart ny ci cogtaçon personal e retenuð, por noc un hom mesveir ant man leyað an autr tay, ben form visaç commettr.|That was mostly a matter of standing by the sideboard like a particularly large vase, but you couldn't drift off into your own private thoughts, lest you miss someone signaling for more tea, or commit a facial expression.
Seveurn l'hour d'accarenç, des y desjeun ne haut er emmenað e fin all'apprestment dy repastin.|Next came the calling hours, from just after the upstairs breakfast was cleared to a bit before tea-time.
Dalvan cos usual parmis ag ci armað de l'oc stent passar asseyent ne hal d'agent e respir prendent un pog, sauf cas y bon Domn au fait reconnuð a accarent ig l'er Recevent, oc avenent noc moutessem a un veg par monð.|At Dalvane, those times of day were usually when you got to sit in the servants' hall and catch your breath a bit, unless her ladyship had put out word that she was In Reception to callers, which didn't happen above once a month or so.
Melle a Gaunt sta enter destegnt, ant collanç incoïbr de tarsc annonç e de convoc a prendr.|The Gaunt melee was a different story, with a constant trickle of calling-cards and invitations turning up.
Y collanç de host dont bonjorn beudar e man bajar parisce incessant.|The flow of guests to greet and make nice to seemed without end.
Y mort incoïbr dell'yam malvaç met fin ag trevold.|The evil uncle's inevitable death brings the book to a close.
I revelau e leu y tarsc cort; un scoul luy creu ag visaç.|He unfolded and read the short note, a scowl growing on his face.
Parcanç sera i megl vos ignoreð l'apprestment de bilrod.|Perhaps it is better you not know how billrod is prepared.
Y magð soupirau.|She sighed.
"L'am noc l'asmuth dell'eç autranç, nos derreu declarar.|"He doesn't like the way things are changing, and that's a fact.
I pogn tis toll'oc seyon connuð."|He's clinging to what he knows."
Fair ig vous e Willaum dað sarf a tabr—i strayau par le prefair de vous, stant y contingent, ma i desirau y mont com i sta pre y var.|Having you and William waiting at table—he was wrong to expect it of you, in the circumstances, but he wanted it to be as it was before the war.
Val vos ig comprenað."|Surely you can understand that."
Fred luy sgardau.|Fred looked at her.
Veg derran oyon l'au attis a Godman explanar, Fred au se tait por y grant bempart d'ig seyon desirað digr.|The last time she'd tried to make excuses for Goodman, he'd bitten back most of what he wanted to say.
Ac i vole noc fair cossy.|He wasn't going to do that now.
"Sey yað un hom soul nell'oc majon," dis i plat, "stant soffrið par y var men a Godman, jo poð noc savir cu l'oc sera.|"If there is anyone in this house," he said levelly, "who has suffered less from the war than Goodman, I don't know who it could be.
Certan noc mey.|Certainly not me.
Ben Hasting."|Or Hastings."
"Or, noc," admis i.|"Well, no," she admitted.
"Portant—"|"But—"
"Jo n'ay l'hour por sy figuration realisar n'y mont stoppant sur far," continu Fred.|"I don't have time to indulge his fantasies about stopping the world in its tracks," Fred went on.
"Ða meðes jo le desira—e j'ig clam cos honest faus."|"Even if I wanted to—which, to be frank, I don't.
Desirað vos savir cal er jo faint, y moment la Godman fey sy picraug inutr poll'ig fest crevoscr?" L'attis alcun respos.|Do you want to know what I was doing, when Goodman was having a temper tantrum about the dinner party?" He didn't wait for an answer.
"J'attene a camin trovar por ascurar ig Hasting yem aubon lon stant denuð sull'occisour meðes."|"I was trying to figure out how to make sure Hastings got through the night without killing himself."
Par dezein (fin a 1411), Natagl e sy marið Joseph regnaurn a catr man.|For a decade (until 1411), Natalia ruled alongside her husband Joseph.
Saf tu cascif tell'yam acceptau noc empley ag Minister por Famigl?|Do you know why your uncle didn't accept a job at the Ministry for Family?
Y grant segr portau un bevis 20⍚ de sachet e le dau ag borser.|The tall man took out a 20⍚ note from his pocket and gave it to the cashier.
Jo vusc ðe envoloirn noc y bourgmer all'oc delusion.|I wish they hadn't involved the mayor in this deception.
Lourell'ouçon remanent, parisc i toð cas final, es l'oc administration e cultur fugr ag saluçon d'ig ðe aun tout oblatað deull'eç við.|So their remaining option, as it stands, is running from the very government and society that they have given everything but their lives to save.
L'oc es indigndað, ma Paul Lacan es hom prest a savir ig bempart dy mont en es.|It isn't fair, but Paul Lacan, of all people, knows that most things aren't.
Par moment pes i dy ci ogl a Hector situað ne visaç blanc eð incertan, agr apen.|He thinks for a while about Hector's eyes in a pale, uncertain face, almost eager.
Paul s'entrouf oyon porraun ðe var, e comoscon un við enter laiscar, costroit a catr man des y fondamen – y soul act dont Paul acaf a star fier.|Paul wonders where they will go, and how they will possibly just drop a whole life built from ground up – the only thing Paul has ever been proud of.
Ma vray direct, Paul porra eð i vil.|But of course, Paul can and he will.
I vil Albion e famigl eð y Minister fugr ne Hector amant, e Hector en vil ne við amant.|He'll run from Albion and family and the Department for love of Hector, and Hector will do it for love of life.
Primer, luy fal y moneð tan possibr portar outr.|First, he has to withdraw as much money as possible.
I possey y cla a Hector, e tandic y borser le men dessou vars y cambr tesoir de Hector, i parform pesar a haut vois commet a fin, parolant ag segr noc envoluð –|He has Hector's key, and when the teller takes him down to Hector's vault, he pretends to think aloud the whole way, talking at the uninterested man –
sy grant ojanç por Hector explanant, proclamant ig l'arra un picq retorsion idiosyncras ne toll'aur a Hector parsount.|explaining how much he hates Hector, and how pointlessly spending all Hector's money will be his own personal little revenge.
pog signfiant oc Hector volois noc reclamar ða Paul er vray conjuraçonnant novant orlosc a caðen n'adamantin acatar coll'aur; y remarcabr es y sgart luy lançað dy borser cant i part, untal pietað a biasc.|It doesn't matter that Hector wouldn't have cared even if Paul did plan to buy ninety titanium watches with the money, the important thing is the look that the teller gives him as he leaves, a kind of sideways pity.
Just exact ig seyon vuscað.|Exactly what he'd been hoping for.
Londr nell'eç dezein posc y var deye acier parformar a fin surveur.|London in the postwar decades had to project strength in order to survive.
Y ci dezein Grand-Jeu fayen noc scap dy preç dell'eç var derran siempr.|The Grand-Jeu decades didn't escape the cost of the earlier wars forever.
Y ci ogl de my fraðr lousern sou clar dy lun oppos.|My brother's eyes gleamed in the light of the full moon.
Poll'un ant porrujon vars aust vos faldra moneð may spendr.|For one with an east-facing balcony, you'll need to spend more.
Ag moment oyon Matthias acavau a scap fair ne cognit dell'aucoum lougent eð y porrujon yembr dessur, y ciel innuoðous au toð residu ne ros soluð e sta affauðant direct vars blau Dachin; y preu stel lusern freit sur y ci montagn slognað norðer.|By the time Matthias managed to slip away from the glittering crowd and step out onto the balcony, the cloudless sky had lost all trace of pink and was fading directly to a Dackin blue; the first stars twinkled cold above the distant mountains to the north.
Y lumner exiguous dell'Ors Majour vole bogr sy form connoscr par febiltað cant Matthias retornau ac pre lugnt; all'uncos sarve ig l'yemoy un convoc Escriva, un noit de lun neir.|The scant light of the Great Bear was going to be far too weak to catch his form when he returned in the hex hours; not for nothing had he obtained an Escriva invitation on the night of a new moon.
Un manton a nuot – ben ploy meðes, y heloit survale tojorn y frescur – fos idone parfait, ma l'œcumen Aragonesc avant sta steðig pittoresq com ja.|Cloud cover – or even rain, the noise was always worth the chill – would have been ideal, but the Aragonese landscape before him was as stubbornly picturesque as ever.
Ne bon mont l'oc hoir affauð pre y fest souscen.|This discontentment should fade before tomorrow's party.
Ant verdur exiguous com manton, ploy a l'œcumen hamarr gravað.|With scant greenery for protection, rain has carved out the jagged landscape.
Y rey a febiltað larc; tu saf i comfy fort demay sull'eç astuçour.|The king has many weaknesses; you know he trusts his advisors too much.
Accaç campaner survale toð meyan actual de correspondr remot.|Steeplepost outclassed every other method of long-distance communication.
Macaria Giosforo saf ig l'yembra noc y ferscip mattin pront la i sal y vec e respir nell'aer fum e mar de Weston, oc bourg commovent.|Macaria Giosforo knows she's missed the morning ferry the moment she steps off the veck and inhales the smoke-sea air of bustling Weston.
Or, par vertað enter y ferscip nað ancour ne havan, ma y ci rig de catoum e de souscrit e de "Carraçon sereð vos sojornant?" son voit dell'eç cogmaðer ne bonet e marcant ne tædium seyon vis normal.|Well – the ferry is technically still at port, but the queues for stamps and signatures and "What is the purpose of your trip?" are empty of the usual bonneted holidaymakers and bored businessmen.
Lon dout, y vascel arra se deshormejað pre Sr Treman porra sy carc e masctig coglir.|No doubt they'll have unmoored before Mr Tremane can collect her luggage and ticket.
"Crerreð vos nos meritau un hostel sur mar, Treman?"|"Do you suppose we merit a sea-front hotel, Tremane?"
Macaria a s'aðelið n'Anglesc, toð cas, ða meðes y gendr local reman cos sporadic incomprensibr.|Macaria's English is improving, at least, although the local variety is still occasionally incomprehensible.
Contrig, sy capabiltað ne Cambresc no's provað in tesquo, eð oy porra i l'ig humiglation particuler repoussar ag crevoscr.|On the other hand, she has never attempted Welsh in tesquo, and now she can save that particular humiliation for this evening.
Y heloit contondent no sta for un hom y port d'entranç crullant.|The pounding noise was just someone knocking on the front door.
L'oc solution effectuar in tesquo surcay mout defaglessem.|Implementing this solution is often more difficult in practice.
Y joun rey vil jamay souscrit dar all'oc concort abhorrent.|The young king will never give his signature to this despicable treaty.
Y havan aye aug calm, e sta profont a mar bas meðes.|The harbour was sheltered, and deep even at low tide.
Matheu aye malaiç e calt tandic i mene y patrician Morracan tras y manoir assombrið.|Matthew felt queasy and hot as he led the Morrack gentleman through the darkened house.
S'envount nell'oc conjuraçon no sta megl all'act por ci Sr Bocuz au luy menaçað descusion.|What he was doing now was no better than what Mr. Bocuz had threatened to expose him for.
Parcanç piour ja.|Perhaps even worse.
Y quanga vel certan le desmettr ða l'aye catoum pront d'ig seyon appos tojorn, Matheu partenent – ma l'oc sey fort raçon aðief por ig i l'occy.|The quanga would surely sack him if he had proof in hand of what he'd always suspected about Mathew – but for this, he might very well murder him.
Toð ig fis a cost, luy fale tan s'entrovar: er Gou Makei ne realtað y patrician attendent?|Besides that, there was the question of whether Lady Mackay was, in fact, expecting the gentleman.
Ða l'en er, volois i noc luy digr la yon se situa sy cambr?|If she were, wouldn't she have told him where her bedroom was?
Gou Makei se creye starc – e Matheu stima y domn pos un bon defis leyar por loit contr un joun domn de bel figleç calscon, s'il surcayeurn con rasc e cavel remorcað – ma pos i l'un leyar por loit contr un segr adult?|Lady Mackay thought she was tough—and Matthew reckoned she could hold her own against any other gently-reared young lady, if it came to scratching and pulling hair—but would she be able to against a grown man?
Or, toll'oc for s'i no'r total raut de sy host nocturnal recevir, com ja pos i star.|That is, if she weren't perfectly thrilled by this nocturnal visit, as perhaps she might be.
Ne l'oc við temerer parmanent vos surcarreð mort.|Keep up this reckless behaviour and you'll end up dead.
Y doncel fis y quayer e rescau y catoum dy novel lettr.|The girl put down her diary and broke the new letter's seal.
Jo le creu joculant ne me dignt dou masctig volen 60⍚ valir!|I thought he was joking when he said two tickets would cost 60⍚!
L'hostel peninsoler sur Ausbagn fornira tout por y cogmaðer particuler.|The peninsular hotel near Ausbagn will provide everything for the discerning holidaymaker.
Dy tarn y camin torque, passant doutr y forsc e l'eç apothecary, doutr eç nou de majon e de farm.|The path from the tavern snaked past the forge and the herbalists, past clusters of houses and farmland.
Cos final, Tomaş trovau Andŗey asseyent sur picq tombr ag tarm dy bourg, y ciel sgardant haut.|Finally, Tomaş found Andŗey sitting on a small hill at the edge of town, looking up at the sky.
Y deskeðant sta ig l'aloud d'Andŗey se situa a sy cost a plaç d'a sy man.|The troubling thing was that Andŗey's lute was by his side instead of in his hands.
Pre poðe Tomaş parolar, Andŗey tornau luy spiar, e la sta uncos pogntous e rendent tait ne sull'ogl.|Before Tomaş could speak, Andŗey turned to look at him, and there was something sharp and silencing in his eyes.
Sou y fosc meðes, Tomaş n'aye alcun defy ne l'acier ag massoir d'Andŗey ben l'ort de sy menton veint.|Even in the darkness, Tomaş had no trouble seeing the steely set to Andŗey's jaw, the lift of his chin.
"Jo crey deïr te digr ig jo's t'amoraçað," dis Andŗey, e con tan Tomaş forn condoit a y ci pousson de sy cour rendr stabr, ðe luy scapaurn comoscon slançant.|"I think I ought to tell you that I'm in love with you," Andŗey said, and though Tomaş had been trained to steady the beating of his heart, he found it racing away from him.
"Me compt noc ða scey un part de tey, oc y bempart usant meðes, ancour Alexia amant; saivað ig j'ay my gant jait dessou.|"It doesn't matter to me if part of you, even most of you, still loves Alexia; know that my gauntlet is cast.
Ða jamay te dis jo noc ig mell'auror e mell'occas son y tien, jo sceus noc me pardonnar."|If I never told you that my sun rises and sets with you, I should never forgive myself."
Y descusion de vostrell'yam porra noc pardon cavir tan fagl.|Your uncle's betrayal cannot be so easily forgiven.
Horreð vos ðe veln vos desmettr ða vos lou refusað?|Are you scared they'll fire you if you refuse?
Nos asseyeum sur tapeç e sgardaum y ci bou arp massant.|We sat on a mat and watched the cows chewing grass.
Mas en nien, jo pieð!|Don't make a fuss about it, please!
Tras port oye jo un hom harp ben aloud crullant.|Outside I could hear someone playing a harp or a lute.
Y Colluïsc Aquarian vendoy pelur sou patronisment de Martin IV.|The Aquarian Guild sold fur under the patronage of Martin IV.
Pre decidr, vos pouð y tarn me loitar.|Before you decide, you can rent out the pub to me.
Y nouç casel, nommað tan y nux, er primer mis a regest annað 1713, posc bre y descovart toð recostroint all'heir Arnoutzen de við unicasel.|The case kernel or the nux was first documented in 1713, shortly after the younger Arnoutzen's revolutionary discovery of one-case life.
Ny ci diagram a sull'aïðour, y Lithovan Marion Hartman (cos frequentessem connuð com fin portant dy Var Russian poll'Austmar), nos veim casel vegetal—plausibr ugnlac sauvaç—stikettað cascun con "punctulus", ben picq pognt.|In the diagrams of his assistant, the Lithowan Marion Hartman (more commonly known for helping to end the Russian War for the Graven), we can see plant cases—probably from the wild onion—each labelled with "punctulus", or little dot.
Cossy y nouç casel es y preu edifiç soucasel stant descovart.|This makes the kernel the first subcase construct to be discovered.
La no's largeç a collocq sur y nouç casel jusc y paç lonc ag fin dy siecr ogtoç, parlocað dy Decadenç Belgradian eð y Deshormejanç Mendevan.|There is little discussion of the kernel until the long peace at the end of the eighteenth century, amidst the Decadence of Belgrade and the Mendevan Unmooring.
Par surcresc, inconnuð es l'hom preu apponent ig ny nouç assey y lengaç vital a Desselut, ma l'idea au y maglur scholastic parvas cos enter (dy Vetomund toð cas) pre annað 1813.|Moreover, it is unclear who first proposed that the kernel might house Desselut's vital language, but the idea had thoroughly percolated at least the Vetomundine scholastic mesh by 1813.
L'oc annað, y theorist Gorjatic Manesc Camdar editau sull'interrogment de fecondation a spogn marin, parcevent ig y nouç casel de sperm unisc coll'ig nouç dell'ou.|In this year, Gurjat theorist Manesh Camdar published his research on fecundation in marine sponges, observing that the kernel of sperm unites with that of the egg.
Nos deyeu tout noscon vis mettr a regest.|We must document everything we see.
L'es y tal connart casc paðel affignt con delug d'ugnlac.|He's the kind of prick who puts a pile of onion in every dish.
Stiketteð l'oc figur ranscel con y bon fondamen corpore.|Label this tree diagram with the correct chemical elements.
L'oc quil a largeç de roum la porreu nos dou dormir afont.|There is plenty of room in this bed for us both to sleep in it.
Par surcresc, je Sambað nos porreu toð y surcrescent pascr.|Moreover, on Saturday we can eat all the leftovers.
Evidenç faïscent variation Iscovalian parva casc œcumen natural.|Evidence for evolution by natural selection is everywhere in nature.
"Or vazdara jo pieð ne Tartary.|"Oh, kindly fuck off to Tartary.
Bravessem ne Scin, ne Cathay—yonoscon eç monð slognað, sou ciel la alcun hom porra vossy parollaç zucarrað oïr,|Even better, to China or Cathay—somewhere months away, a land where none can understand your fucking candied words,
vostrell'eç suggestion jonnovar me torquent e me tirant e m'ammenant vars me fornir coll'annihilation a my mesur!|your butterfly-innocent suggestions that twist and pull and guide me to build myself a bespoken annihilation!
Vos eð y mont atorn forgað ne livr tellard, toð inscaut par sign e histoir deluïscent,|You have forged the world around me into a mapbook, all inscribed with false signs and histories,
por vel jo vostrell'eç camin cadarað sevir e vostrell'eç conjuraçon accommettr!|that I might follow your distilled pathways and undertake your designs!
Un semman may soul dell'oc foltað e jo volois my sour meðes, my neuç occir; erað vos desirant ig jo me suicy toð cas final?|One week more of this madness and I should have killed my own sister, my niece; was I meant to take my own life in the end?
Ben creyað vos m'aïr anim corros tan aðief ig jo pos me resouvr all'ersteigon de vossy mal?"|Or did you believe you had so thoroughly corroded my soul that I could endure the ersteigon of your evil?"
Covrað vossy ci plant mogn con manton a maglur fin cas ig ðe cain pasct.|Cover your shorter plants with a fine mesh sheet so that animals don't eat them.
Y Minister a Defas Arithmat vos dara bors interrogment l'eç catr annað.|The Department of Computing will give you a four-year research grant.
Vos deyeð tenir all'idea—y Tar no's y Tellard.|You must remember, the Map is not the Territory.
Ða tu vil mell'ivan menaçar, vazdara!|If you're gonna threaten my kids, fuck off!
Vos deyeð noc corrir ny relicquat!|You mustn't run inside the museum!
Y camin cadarað de við luxuir e crous a larc hom cogntið.|The primrose path of a luxurious and hollow life has trapped many.
Malgrað, piratary spas graç all'Abanc novomondin ne 1471 eð all'Ascendanç vascon coherent.|However, piracy thrived with the Novomundine landfall in 1471 and the accompanying Ascendancy of Vascony.
A Marsegl, la stan gazou frequent aðief por ig plusour ageurn com ða y citað fos occupað; donc y risc fuyeurn heilant vars scurtað certanessem.|In Marsella, the raiding became so frequent that many behaved as though the city were occupied, the wealthy fleeing to safer pastures inland.
Y ci rekest por aïðanç stant fait a Rudolf VIII remaneurn plurem lon respos.|The aid requests presented to Rudolf VIII went largely unanswered.
Por cartað, l'er parcanç divertið pall'ig conflict bavarian continu, ma cos usual nos dirreu y rey joun er just curant for a luy (ben a cost de luy, a sell'amour nombrous) eð a festeul spendent sur lac.|Charitably, one might say he was distracted by the ongoing Bavarian conflict, but it is generally allowed that the young king was simply concerned only with himself (or by extension his many lovers) and with resplendent lakeside banquets.
Toð yemoy sell'Ersteigon ag closiscment dy siecr cinqueç.|Things came to a head in the last years of the fifteenth century.
Segr Daniel Menton dy lign Amigòt au y soutien de Marc V de Franç garantið, coll'astuç dy general-orphan Guillen daus Sanz.|Lord Daniel Menton of the house of Amigòt had secured the aid of King Marc V of France, on the advice of the foundling-general Guillen daus Sanz.
Cossy preparað, luy e plusour famigl nobr d'autr deposern libertað deur Genef y veint-primer Jugn 1499.|Thus prepared, he and several other noble families declared independence from Geneva on the twenty-first of June, 1499.
Nossy ferscip caura abanc posc dou hour may.|Our ferry will make landfall in two more hours.
Jo so amoraçað a cainç dell'hom accaç.|I have fallen completely in love with the postman.
Y scaðr tissour Tiong parmis recoglenç d'accostur laboriosessem.|The Tiong loom allowed clothing to be produced more efficiently.
Ac compt for sunçon e noc mandað.|Here only usage counts, not prescription.
Calamin, nommað tan jast igniac, es matier reconnuð ne casc loy dy mont des antictað.|Calamine, or chalk of jast, is a substance known since antiquity across the world.
Ig inclus, ag siecr 3aN ja ern y Roman calamin benoçant por bras forgar, n'oc fondent con cuivr.|For example, as early as the 3rd century aN the Romans were using calamine to make brass, by smelting it with copper.
Plusour scet, y sestertius parmig (veyað y starç, un scet borlesc postimperial) fosn quinað ne bras posc y reform augustin de 23aN—il ig nommaurn orichalcum.|Several coins, including the sestertius (cf. the starce, an early Borlish coin) were minted from brass after the 23aN Augustine reforms—they called it orichalcum.
Calamin a y parsan d'orteyanç eð autr machy a piel soutenuð ny remed tras annað millener, eð ancour sarf i de nossy jorn com part ne crem a cavel.|Calamine has served as a treatment for rashes and other skin blemishes for thousands of years, and it is still used today as a component of hair creams.
Sur production atelier l'oc es matier hagr por gom faus fair, eð a mesur dell'eç dezein recent lamp a lumner PAD ant calamin afont son entrað ne benoç commun.|In workshop manufacture it is an essential part of pseudogum production, and in the last few decades daplight lamps using calamine have entered common use.
Y solt es un scet prent ne cuivr jusc 1134 e n'argent apres.|The shilling is a coin made of copper until 1134 and silver afterwards.
Por y lign de Natagl e Joseph, oy no fo la spien a parsan.|For Natalia and Joseph's line, there was now no hope of recovery.
Y Rey a un orteyanç se caut ancour; scan mey pommat!|The King has a rash again—bring me up some ointment!
Vos pouð noc peðir jo vos aðeil lon nien com balanç.|You cannot ask that I grant you land for nothing in return.
Leonta trou y zetr parmy sy fougl facsimilað sur alchemy ag moment apen ig l'yem cas luy, sy sac spal vogdant tras sur y tabr a quelt.|Leonta finds the zetter in among her alchemical copysheets almost as soon as she arrives home, emptying her shoulderbag onto the dining table.
Un hom sceus, i deye admettr, le passar lon alcun burden ne sy sac entr y clas aubon e l'oc hour.|There had, admittedly, been ample occasion for someone to slip it into her bag between the morning class and now.
Indoutabr a i le laiscað insurveilað unveg ben may a mesur de sy nombrous hour a majon livr dy facultað, un certan volum carnt parmy y ci roum labyrinthin stant untal emblem dell'Universtað a Sant Marin.|Doubtless she had left it unattended at least once in her several hours in the faculty bookhouse, searching for a particular volume among the labyrinthine spaces so emblematic of the University of Saint Marinus.
Ben parcanç meðes yon l'interromoy retorn n'y rout veil citaðer pedallant con un quignou acatant dy refectoir.|Or perhaps even as she stopped to buy a pastry from the refettorio, before pedalling on down the old town streets.
Nentamen, i vacillau pre y ragot rescað fair defleiçar.|Nonetheless, she hesitated before unfolding the torn scrap.
L'idea fol au stað a Marco, primer—hour demay passað ne zortlasce sgardant.|The foolish idea had been Marco's, at first—too many hours watching the blacklayers.
Y meyan por ascurar, l'au dit, ig ða vray y mont er gournað par dæmon obscur capabr de se delir des y memoir a ci lou veint, luy i pos toð cas en descovrir.|Assurance, he had said, that if indeed the world was controlled by shadowy demons who could wipe themselves from the minds of those who saw them, he could at least find out about it.
Cos retenuð au Leonta y nom Erculaneo triað, sou motif ig l'er alchemy studiant a noc histoir, e donc l'ig bourg vole noc plausibr se cavir svoccað par hasart.|Leonta had privately chosen the name Erculaneo, on the grounds that she was studying alchemy, not history, so the town was unlikely to come up by accident.
L'edition dy zetr scandalous Darchild akirtau Cant n'insorgenç.|Publishing the scandalous Darchild memo sparked unrest in Kent.
Y preu facsimilation d'un heredtatur human enter fo ne prinvir 1969.|The first time a human genome was copied in entirety was in spring 1969.
Val nos landreu y ferið e soulor mettreu un pommat contr zoia dessur.|We should wash the wound and then apply an anti-bacterial salve to it.
Y megl quignou d'armað cavibr nell'oc bourg vien de Cas Pamfey.|The best worker's pie you can get in this town comes from Pamfey's.
Y vertað suraðoint fos ig, digr y vesteul ag davarn sta stivað.|It would have been an exaggeration to say that the hotel's lobby was crowded.
Nentamen, Zoe Pentros descovroy i poðe noc s'asseïr for ne s'addant a plaç mi dy convoc actif d'un hom la ben dy soltum affloisað d'un autr.|Nonetheless, Zoë Pentross found she couldn't take a seat without inserting herself into someone's lively conversation or another's relaxed solitude.
A loy i tene pos, appenent sur y pladisc, cla portant ne man scert e vin Empordan (bon cos ajoutant) ne man distr.|Instead she remained standing at the bar, keys in her left hand and a gratifyingly-good Empordan wine in her right.
"Soð vos ac por l'avent dy Rey novel a Nadacou veir?" Un segr haut e slanc colluïsc Zoe sur y pladisc, remplisc peðent all'hontarn con saluð.|"Are you here to see the new King arrive in Nadacou?" A tall, slender man joined Zoe at the bar, signalling the tender for a refill.
Carraçon caveu i raug cant vos le svoccau?|Why did he get angry when you brought it up?
Nos poum noc y gra suraðoir dell'oc combat.|We cannot overstate the importance of this battle.
Nos n'eu redon aðief por semman passar n'untal davarn.|We don't have enough money on hand to stay in a hotel like that.
I lançau un pavar sur pladisc lon y tarner sgardant.|He threw a coin onto the counter without looking at the innkeeper.
A mesur dell'eç annað, y centuir a David IV eð a Augost combattoirn por autortað sur y bourg nombrous all'estuer Severn.|In these years, the armies of David IV and King August battled for control of the various towns on the Severn estuary.
Bristou meðes fo emposseïð deur gournanç vessaxon un dezein ben may pres 1270 N.|Even Bristow was wrested from Wessern authority for at least a decade around 1270 N.
Cossy er y concarnç a Dorogn par Ivan de Cartau (accommis nell'enç lon soutien de Rey David) yent pre y fin dy siecr trecem.|Thus was Ivan of Cartaw's conquest of Devon (undertaken at first without the support of King David) achieved by the end of the century.
Y moment apen ig David aðeleu y Taleð Dorogner, malgrað, ignitaurn y tijon usual entr lou e Marclont.|Almost as soon as David declared the Tallath of Devon, however, did the usual tensions with Markland ignite.
Y novel rey Andre II ant ment martial, stant nevoð ag rey derran, n'au alcun dy poliðeç de sell'yam.|The martial-minded new king Andrew II, nephew of the previous king, shared none of his uncle's diplomacy.
I relançau y Rix Mallor con gazou sur Carvantel ne prinvir 1301 N, l'abbaðy Sant Brigid original incendiað enter durant.|He restarted the Mallor Wars with the Sack of Car Vantel (Rexam) in 1301 N, during which the original St. Brigid's Abbey burnt to the ground.
Rey Aðelouf soloy y var contr y cantesc por sy sou-nobr ajoutar.|King Athelwolf declared war on the Kentish to gratify the noble families.
Y preu havan y nogt passað la ne tar brittesc es Iscom, a Dorogn.|The first British harbour we'll spend the night at is Iscom in Devon.
Posc pieç minut er y sar remorcað des y mar torvant.|After a few minutes the net was pulled out of the troubled sea.
All'yent de May Connagt sta prest a var souvr.|By the beginning of May Connaught was ready to declare war.
Parcanç es i temerer, y decadenç a trevogt blasmar unic ag morostað n'Europ posc y var.|It is perhaps foolhardy to attribute the decline of Voidtale trevolds solely to the gloom of post-war Europe.
Nos posseu tan digr, parmig, l'idea de novel œcumen splorar e de novel cultur encontrar n'au plu attragnt; l'ovartur caddicivenean laiscau pog "tar enigmatic" por descovrir,|We might say, for example, that the idea of exploring new lands and meeting new civilisations had lost its shine, with the opening of Caddicivene leaving few "mysterious lands" to discover,
eð y sar campaner defassant parmis a gent ne toð loy de communeyar cos veloç fort may (particuler, apprendr ig politia lontan stan magn ordineressem a sy figuration!)|and the developing steeple-mesh allowing people everywhere to communicate far more rapidly (in particular, to discover that distant nations were often much less exotic than one imagined!).
Toð cas final, romanç parachthon partenent, y dezein milloy dy siecr novoç sta untal nazir.|In any case, when it comes to parachthon romance, the middle of the nineteenth century was somewhat of a nadir.
Posc meðes au Europ parsan fait e fo l'abondanç general dy ci annað Atelier soluð grant, y form er destarrið pall'ort de stoir masquira.|Even once Europe had recovered and the general prosperity of the Workshop decades had truly got going, the genre was displaced by the rise of masquira fiction.
Y ci Nou Provençal son connuð par lour pantort a dromig.|The New Provincials are known for their blackberry pies.
Vossy preu stauron es cavibr n'un dy sanatoir a Ausbagn.|You can get your first IUD from one of the Ausbagn clinics.
J'am noc y plurem raðar a Ausçagm; la son tombr demay.|I don't for the most part like cycling in Ausçagm; it's too hilly.
Un accaçour raðant tras l'icon, y film situant certan n'asc Bel-Jou.|A cycling postman crosses the screen, fixing the film in the Grant-Jeu period.
Durant y siecr catorç ençau nos a normalisation real parcevir dy model mitað-asc d'universtað tras Europ, de Galway a Gratz.|It is during the fourteenth century that we see true standardisation of the mediaeval university system across Europe, from Galway to Gratz.
Y Reyaum a Boral dell'oc hour triant parmig, Lyce Noccair addoceu sy studiant nell'eç Cinq Art Romannesc.|For example, in the Kingdom of Borland at this time, Noccair Lyceum taught its students the Five Romantic Arts.
L'eç stan de natur l'art prosequent dy set domain classic a studiar (e fort ern ðe tan connuð contemporane par nom d'art classic ben liberal).|These were in essence the descendants of the seven Classical areas of study (and indeed they were also known at the time as the Classical or liberal arts).
Y Cinq Art ern Literatur, Argument, Accont, Geometry e Music.|The Five Arts were Literature, Argument, Reckoning, Geometry and Songcraft.
Ag commet dy siecr cinqueç diminoy l'oc model cos gradual; facultað nombrous addau souject novel, ig inclus histoir, lengaç eð alchemy.|The start of the fifteenth century saw the gradual decline of this system, with various institutions introducing new subjects, such as history, languages and alchemy.
Y parol sur y delt stan febr demay; jo poðe noc lou leir.|The writing on the tablet was too faded for me to read.
Sell'abiltað ne clavir es gran aðief por prosequent fair, e bogr tan may.|His keyboard-playing ability is good enough to accompany, and no better.
Lour y pas faus triant parmig, cossireð y Semman a Tonneðr.|As an example of what they did wrong, consider the Week of Thunder.
J'oyeu l'ig connart fatuous rompoy trey dois n'un monð.|I heard that clumsy idiot broke three tachs in one month.
Diabr sta i feliç a se trovar ac, ða meðes oy passau i jorn sou perigl d'applatiscenç par col livr.|He was damned lucky to be here, even if he now lived in danger of being crushed by a book landslide.
Arthur fo vas ag var ogtoç eld, e fo reluð posc nouf annað descovrent i sta l'ivan extrane d'un famigl lon gravitað mendrem.|Arthur had gone to war at eighteen, and come back nine years later to find himself the extraneous child of a family of little import.
Sur mar ben ne Madray er i vis com cim forgað, un ven dont slança experiç vocationner cordamn fruyant e tout souvant.|At sea or in Madray he'd been a forged expert, a wellspring of professional expertise who knew the ropes and had seen it all.
Cas luy a Carvantel, i fo denuð ancour joun segr, hom a pog addoçment eð a alcun histoir empley.|Back in Carvantel he'd become a young man again, one with little training and no experience.
Pre y var un atelier carpenter au le benoçað un apprendent, ma l'ig parisce remotessem a jouneç.|He'd been apprenticed to a carpenter's shop before the war, but that felt like a lifetime ago.
For sarve i ac a hom occir, stant dissuas.|All he was good at now was killing people, which was discouraged.
L'eç cont mi-mythos a rey e volour son nommað stoir romannesc.|These semi-mythical stories of kings and thieves are called romantic tales.
Y luissoir d'aur diminois for posc y pouvranç a Daclont fo treblað.|The lust for gold only weakened once Dackland's population had tripled.
Posc je sy nascenç la's un coul tar desig plou lort.|After his birthday there was a landslide due to heavy rain.
L'eç defy farraun de mey un cim forgað.|These challenges will make me a seasoned expert.
De Roger e Carolin d'Avosc nascoirn ogt ivan, dont Adagle sta tressem.|Roger and Caroline d'Avosche had eight children, and Adaillé was the third.
Sy dou fraðr antir moroy com sugtour (un certan desig Scon Grant Morrenç), tan con sy fraðr postir Peðr, e sy jounessem sour Anna.|Her two older brothers died in infancy (at least one in the Second Great Dying), as well as her younger brother Peter, and her youngest sister Anne.
Cossy sta i durant y grant plurem ag jouneç l'heriter appos dy ducað.|Thus she was for the great majority of her childhood the heir presumptive of the duchy.
L'eç prefaction, toglað afont coll'eç condoçment de preu sy noðriç Elisa Arnoutszen (cosvour dy sanat parnommað) e soulor sy ci aðelent, animaurn sy natur entrovant eð ingenious.|These expectations, combined with the instructions of at first her nurse Elisa Arnoutszen (cousin of the renowned physician) and later her tutors, encouraged her inquisitive and intelligent nature.
Jo porray noc le stikettar prest a condoçment porsevir.|I cannot say that she is ready to continue her training.
Nos deyeu vos dissuadir de l'eç monc a Golfhaun fascar.|We must advise you not to anger the Gulfhaven monks.
Y joun segr entrau ny varous, sugtour fassað ag peitrin.|The young man entered the shop, an infant swaddled on his chest.
Vos derreð sona luïr de cosvour febr n'y duc acconnoscent.|You will have to pose as distant cousins when you are introduced to the duke.
I no's dur a continuar soll'apres dy mort de sy marið.|It isn't difficult to go on in the wake of her husband's death.
Parveg sent Claire l'ig sey ne bon mont.|Sometimes Claire feels like it should be.
Ig l'au y cainç tan toccað, ig l'au parmis tan direct all'aðombracer Mr Becond le dirisc n'ouvr sug, y mort aus le fragnt.|Considering her hand in things, that she'd let herself be so readily manipulated into doing Mr Becond's dirty work, it should have taken her apart.
L'aus l'incendiað toð a tar.|It should have burned her down to the ground.
Ma a loy—a loy i le refay.|But instead—instead it remakes her.
Y celebr Claire Robiquet pren martel por aïðar con y recostroinç, Auscapel stant cicatricið ja ancour pall'abat dy Grant Centuir, acr a farm laiscað crous, blazað;|The illustrious Claire Robiquet steps up to help with the reconstruction, scarred all over again by the Grand Army's fight, acres of farmland left a burned-out husk;
e Claire se pon avant un grauf e resaif y signfianç d'un objectif aïr.|and Claire stands at a grave and rediscovers what it means to have purpose.
Cascif fout vossy cognit un parnommað?|Why the fuck are you undercover as a celebrity?
Y position d'Anscon com aðelent ag joun heriter apporta magn advantaç.|Anscon's position as tutor to the young heir brought many advantages.
Y rey Eustasc meðes pris martel posc y quagment 1755 a Lisbon.|King Eustace himself stepped up after the 1755 Lisbon earthquake.
Jo fo yent tost demay eð y varous cociner no sta ovart.|I had arrived too early and the kitchen store wasn't open.
Y Reyaum Vascon a Navarr eð Aquitain asseyeu ag commet dy regn d'Ambrosc III un eðegl moneter vital.|The Vascon Kingdom of Navarre and Aquitaine at the start of Ambrose III's reign inhabitated a key economic position.
Y païs sta l'onc entr y ci gran magl trocant republican ny Miterran (particuler posc Port Calè redugnt a mesur dy fenç 1449)|It was the link between the great republican trade networks of the Middlesea (especially since taking Port Calè in the 1449 partition)
eð y colanç marcer accelerandessem des Albion goineð e des, aust ancour, y citað colluïsc teudesc e bautesc.|and the accelerating flow of goods from Welsh Albion and, further east, the Dutch and Graven guild cities.
Cant Andalus abattoy insorgenç politic—dou cris a succession e l'abansanc 1457 ne Lisbon, com eç primer—|While Andalus struggled with political unrest—two consecutive succession crises and the 1457 Lisbon Massacre, to start with—
Ambrosc careu influyenç vascon spandr de star un mojol dy magl trocant vars denir un font de recoglenç meyan per se.|Ambrose sought to extend Vascon influence from being a trade-mesh hub to becoming a seat of resource production in itself.
Dominanç brittesc sull'Atlantic au lontemp famigl pescour vasq frustrað,|British dominion over the Atlantic had long frustrated Vask fishing families,
dont ci sodal prepondraurn ja parmy l'aristocracy e posseyeurn forç politic remarcabr ny cort a Ambrosc.|members of which still predominated in the aristocracy and held significant political power in Ambrose's court.
Pall'oc façon sta y stabliscment dy Novel Enterpris Navarran un manouvr treblað:|In this way the founding of the New Navarre Enterprise was a three-fold manœuvre:
primer, oc reitfiau y position de Vascony com forniscour e porçonnour suprem de març trocað par Europ enter;|first, it solidified Vascony's position as supreme supplier and distributor of trade goods throughout Europe;
dovem, oc dau a sy vassal y possendessem un rout vars autortað e risceç y thron noc menaçant;|second, it gave his most powerful vassals an avenue to power and riches that did not threaten his position,
treim (ig degnant i poðe bogr savir), oc mis Vascony ne plaç por y descovart y signfiandessem ny siecr cinqueç acavar…|third (though he could not know this), it set up Vascony to make the most important discovery of the fifteenth century…
"Jo poð noc oc sgardar," dis i, vois quagent.|"I can't watch this," she said, her voice trembling.
Jo slançau all'eðegl, attenent a respirar calmessem.|I rushed to the alcove, trying to breathe more quietly.
Y novel rout vil y burden redugr de març portar a Damborn.|The new road will make it easier to ferry goods to Dambourne.
La sera març foyer ag marcað je Lun ne Haukirç.|There will be small wares at the Monday market in Haukirch.
Y reverend Carol Zancoud sta cos plausibr y parson l'influyendessem vars y defas moneter dy bourg.|The reverend Carol Zancoud was possibly the most important factor in the town's economic development.
I luïsceu l'ig sona por y bourg des 1584 fin a morir 1630, untal possenç politic aðoint ig Sauveir d'Orz (bourgmer 1620–26) dis lonc tesmoin "Un parol soul dy reverend sceus y stif animar a me mortfiar."|He ministered to the town from 1584 until his death in 1630, gaining such political power that Sauveir d'Orz (mayor 1620–26) reportedly said "One word from the reverend could have had me executed by the mob."
Pre lugnt de siecr settoç ja l'au autortað emposseïð sur ci accaçað marcer de Provenç.|By the dawn of the seventeenth century he had already assumed authority over what Provence sent to trade.
Oc sevent vien strait des y quayer a sy figl primer, Natagl:|What follows is an extract from the diary of his eldest child Natalie:
Tant con y carc usual de març calscon desirað dy Concert Mastoiset sbolognar con (bon Paðr crey nien aðerraun nostrell'amicabiltað tal com eramn e far may accaçant, ben sinoc trevaglour demay por ig effojar e forgar nossy cavibr), Marco sta vellig aðief por y ci hebdomader Marseglan accomblar, donc eu nos novel de veil mont y preu veg dell'annað.|Along with the usual bevy of whichever goods the Concert wishes to foist upon the Mastoisèt (Father believes nothing will do as much good for our diplomacy as sending more bronze and iron, or at least more men to mine and smith any we can dig up for ourselves), Marco was good enough to stockpile the Marsella weekly papers, so we have news of the old country for the first time all year.
Vos pouð noc for pegntar sur un fenç ny mur.|You can't just paint over a crack in the wall.
Y siesc eð abansanc sevent a Wackefell denommau Rey David.|The siege and subsequent Wackefell massacre destroyed King David's reputation.
Vostrell'yam poð gent influïr ne ci Palaç Jagovin meðes.|Your uncle can influence people in even the Jacobin Estates.
Saveð vos cascif aug span ne gelant?|Do you know why water expands when it freezes?
"Lucas Marcuszen?" dis Sr Barracat, posc l'ouçon de novel associað a Benjamin oïr.|"Lucas Marcuszen?" Mr. Barracat said, when he heard Benjamin's choice for his new partner.
"Bon trianç. Ma la's uncos vos valent savir pre decidr final."|"Good choice. But there is something you should know before making a final decision."
"Jo connosc deja l'es dannesc, bossir," dis Benjamin.|"I'm already aware he's Danish, sir," Benjamin said.
Certan des autr agent vascon scanen reclam cas y nation a Lucas, suggernt ig, com outem, i no'r for comfiabr tandic y ci envou a JY no fosn y ci a Collujon combattent sou ciel ovart.|A number of the other Vascon agents took issue with Lucas' nationality, suggesting that, at best, he could only be trusted as long as JY's interests weren't in open conflict with the Collusion's.
Parveg s'entrova Benjamin carraçon ðe apponen tout ig, s'y Bel Joy denoy violent, JY vel obligað sociar con Vascony.|Benjamin sometimes wondered why they assumed that, if the Good Game became violent, JY would automatically side with Vascony.
I sta un organisment tras tarm, cas final.|It was an international organisation, after all.
Calscon parmy pos fieltað descovrir sevrað.|Any of them could face divided loyalties.
"Eð i retien comport allagr con, donc i sera nominal un souject, ða nien autr."|"And he's still on good terms with them, so he must at least nominally be a subject."
Barracat ig ignorau agil.|Barracat brushed that aside.
"Oc son casc agent dannesc. Marcuszen, soul, es tan kinæd admis."|"All of the Danish agents are. Marcuszen, however, is also an admitted thayen."
Yorvic ne siecr deg denoy mojol commarç poll'eiðel dannesc.|Tenth-century York became a trade hub for the Danish lands.
Implausibr sta l'oc amigtað entr soldart e sodal dy cort a Rey David.|This friendship of a soldier and a member of King David's court was unlikely.
Alor deum nos raccular, dec l'enmig nos prepondra.|Then we had to retreat as the enemy outnumbered us.
Ðe porraun bogr y manouvr paregl repeðir souscen.|They can hardly just try the same manœuvre again tomorrow.
"Soð vos ac por l'avent dy Rey novel a Nadacou veir?" Un hom haut e slanc colluïsc Zoe sur y pladisc, remplisc peðent all'hontarn con saluð.|"Are you here to see the new King arrive in Nadacou?" A tall, slender man joins Zoe at the bar, signalling the tender for a refill.
"Noc ig Sy Nobiltað veir, per se," demorau Zoe, se sarvent dell'occasion por tornar avars e sy novel soiç sgardar fort.|"Not to see His Grace, per se," Zoe demurs, taking the opportunity to turn and look properly at her new companion.
Cavel fosc e coutrað cort; oc no stant usual parmy gent ant lonc caðen ancestral veunt proism, ma dy tegnt visacer val le pesar noc enter foran.|Dark hair, closely-shorn—not typical among those with long family ties in the area, though his complexion suggested he wasn't entirely foreign.
"O, clar comoscon!" Y soury prolongant tras y visaç dy segr es delicat e curious.|"Ah, of course!" The smile that spreads across the man's face is charming and curious.
Un hom raut par enigma, parcanç, ben toð cas oc volent le supportar por gra de collocq.|Someone delighted at mystery, perhaps, or at least someone willing to humour it for the sake of conversation.
"Vos conjuraçonnað se pondr sull'un rout deur nossy tragres souscen, j'appon?"|"You plan to stand one street over from tomorrow's parade, I take it?"
Y majon mandaðer borallesc no'r reitfiað pre siecr ogtoç.|The location of the Borlish legislative building was not fixed until the eighteenth century.
Trou mey un voutaç possent mell'heir sanar.|Find me a witch who can cure my son.
L'eç jammel se crein y mont aðief por ty cognit noc doutar un moment.|The twins think so highly of themselves that they won't doubt your cover for an instant.
Jo spiau ty femn beint auvorn ag tarn floy.|I saw your wife drinking copiously at the riverside pub.
Sy veðr a autun ancour tenent, Tristan flannau cos leger atras a ci port rollant polið parlocað de vriðel a broccat lort e stant all'un cost dy roum fruy, eç ovrent vars y gardin floriscent dy hostel.|Still holding his glass of autune, Tristan strolled casually over to the polished sliding doors framed by heavy brocade curtains at one side of the ballroom, which opened out onto the lush hotel gardens.
L'un cost rollant atras, i sorteu furtif e kieð e seveu y camin pian corvant com picq ny verdur.|Sliding one side open, he slipped out quietly and followed the gently winding cobblestone path into the greenery.
Y nogt ac sta fresc gentil, e certan autr gent—par eç dou, grant part—ern tan flannant atorn, y gardin bel compos splorar.|It was a pleasantly cool night out, and a few other people—couples, mostly—were also strolling around exploring the beautifully landscaped gardens.
Posc raut sgardant por ascurar alcun hom no fos cur particuler luy dant, i vayau vars un folker pot e, n'y cla seyon volað tostessem de Crahl des sy croun, le laiscau cair ny pot, le prement fix ny moð por y lousc trayent a metal no sey vis.|Taking a quick look around to make sure nobody was paying particular attention to him, he wandered over to a potted fern and, slipping the key he'd taken from Crahl earlier out of his pocket, dropped it into the pot, pressing it firmly into the dirt so nobody would see the telltale glint of metal.
L'eiðel Avosc trocau pogn cinq veg ny siecr settoç soul.|The Avosche lands changed hands five times in the seventeenth century alone.
Com er jo voluð savir i vole jammel cavir?|How was I supposed to know she was having twins?
nien sou y blau n'a se prodoit posc my lettr derran.|Nothing of importance has happened since my last letter.
Gahað es connuð de scarçour sanat par nom "glair neir".|Jet is known to medical fraudsters by the name "black amber".
E portant i poðe noc condoçment beudar a Marcuccio, dec com vole i un studiant instroir coll'art de libronexion? Ma ig degnant Ignazo fos mut, ancour fos i abr a scaur.|And yet he could not take Marcuccio as his apprentice, for how was he to instruct a pupil in the art of bookbinding? But although Ignazo could not speak, he could write.
Un annað eð un jorn scaus i, cascun de sy method e sell'art descrint; untal stemn d'ovegl por y pagrmen, untal eld de casner poll'encost.|For a year and a day he wrote, describing all his methods and arts, from the pedigree of sheep for the parchment, to the age of the oak tree for the ink.
Cossy l'educau Marcuccio, y production d'un livr detaglant oc stant jammel exact l'un seyon fait, for ig y facsimile vel nien aïr scaut afont.|In this way he taught Marcuccio, detailing the production of a book exactly like the one he had himself written, save that the copy would be utterly blank.
Sur y fougl dereðr, Ignazio scaus sy commant final: Et omnia hic scripta scribas illic—E tout ac scaut, scaureð vos afont.|Upon the last page, Ignazio wrote his final instruction: Et omnia hic scripta scribas illic—And all that is written here, you shall write therein.
Alor Marcuccio recevoy y livr, eð en studiau.|And thus Marcuccio received the book, and studied from it.
E posc monð larc retornau i a Ignazio, livr jammel ne sell'embraç.|And after many months did he return to Ignazio, twin books in his arms.
Ke oc farreð vos toð cas, façað oc por gra dy Segr.|As you will act thus regardless, act in the name of the Lord.
Jo vey alcun raçon por nos demoreu.|I see no reason we should delay.
Lour y tegnt visacer suggeren jorn larc sou sol blanc.|Their complexions were indicative of many days in the sun.
Portant y benoç por y natur contr-zoia a cuivr ant ci issent spandent y laðessem no sera for y retenour stauron.|But the application of copper's counter-zoic manner with the furthest-reaching consequences can only be the stauron retainer.
Nentamen, majour es ig nossy sgart modern sevrar deull'ig temporane.|Nonetheless it is important to separate our modern point of view from the contemporary.
Y ci nos appariscent com sodal evident dy stauron recaren mout dezein d'annað por yembr.|What seem to us like obvious components of the retainer often took dozens of years to innovate.
Parmig, y croy T dy stauron modern smarc noc prell'ascuranç a 1877 dy Majon Sanater de Sant Agrippina—model tostessem contenen annel e helix!|For example, the T-cross of the modern retainer doesn't arise until the St. Agrippina Medical House 1877 patent—earlier designs included rings and helices!
Y gat theoretic avant l'oc façon a coyenç defassar sta comprendr ig cuivr metal poðe casel sperm occir, tan com zoia.|The theoretical barrier to developing this kind of prevention was recognising that copper metal could kill sperm cases as well as zoia.
Ig degnant y natur contr-zoia a cuivr au stað mis a regest a e posc 1789 (ig inclus y ci ouvr d'alchemist Suxúmawaca bint as-Sáffat), l'oc parceuçon spandr fin a sperm covrir vole noc avenir pre 1824, ny traiscnant dy Var Teudesc Dovem.|Although copper's counter-zoic manner had been documented since 1789 (see the work of alchemist Suxúmawaca bint as-Sáffat), extending this observation to sperm would have to wait until 1824, in the aftermath of the Second German War.
L'aucoum clamaurn tandic ençau y tragres.|The crowd cheered as the parade began.
Euspeð saveu luy vale le spuðar, ma oy er i attragnt apar.|Elspeth realised she ought to reject him, but now she was intrigued.
Frederic rovau: "Cu nijommau l'oc livr tan ligs?"|Frederick asked "Who bound this book so smoothly?"
L'oc reliquat tien y pagrmen original dell'Accort Ducal.|This museum has the original parchment of the Ducal Accords.
Nos vism dou segr entrar ny varous dereðr.|We saw two men enter the shop across the road.
Ðe voun noc un coval d'untal stemn haut antal preç bas!|They won't sell a horse with such a good pedigree at such a low price!
Challow Jankin asseyeu ne soupirant.|Challow Jankin sat down with a sigh.
L'er toð cas yent a un caðer cavir.|He had, at least, managed to find a seat.
Y period trevagl novel seyon triað luy surcaye missiblessem – un commet eð un fin tostessem y dou stan y camin afaç raçonnabr.|His new hours were working out better for him – an earlier start with an earlier finish was the sensible way forward.
All'hour sey poðe i tojorn apen un caðer ag Soutar se promettr, ða meðes l'oc se situa ny ci boncop.|At six he could almost always guarantee a seat on the Dusker, even if it was in the coppers.
Certan un hour surrun vole i se habituar a sveilar tost diabr sou y ciel gris-aur a Tommarth e pre un trot freit e soltumesc vars y termin Kibbrogh.|Surely at some point he would get used to waking up morbidly early to the grey-gold Tommarth sky and a chilly, lonely walk to the Kibbrogh stop.
Challow appis ados e tirau des sy croun sell'ardois; la sta dey minut seyon usabr pre ðe parvenois Cathedral.|Challow leant back and reached into his pocket for his slate; he had ten minutes to waste before they'd pull in at Cathedral.
Vos n'eð oc detaglað y citað voscon en parolað.|You haven't specified which city you're talking about.
Thomas souriau n'un caliç d'autun luy scencant auvorn.|Thomas smiled as he poured her a generous glass of autune.
Preu cos: l'amand tostir fin a aurfiað e lou pisar ne pouvr gros.|First bake the almonds until golden and grind to a coarse powder.
An frigsoir lað l'ougl raccaldar, e soulor l'amand, agl, ugnlac eð arjon frigr par cinqueç minut atorn, ben fin ag leum sein mol.|In a broad pan heat the oil, then gently fry the almond, garlic, onion and pepper for roughly fifteen minutes, or until the vegetables are soft.
Scon cos: y gran pevr e demy a vurt mettr e toglar con.|Add the drypepper and half the herbs and stir together.
Posc dou minut un dragm ag vin mettr e parmettr de boglir pres apart.|After two minutes add a dram of the wine and allow it to mostly boil off.
Or y rougl scadom ben scadom pisað mettr, y remanent ag vin scencar dessur, e tout cocinar cinqueç minut may.|Now add the shadome sauce or chopped shadomes, pour in the rest of the wine, and cook for fifteen minutes more.
Tarç cos: y zossa a pescot sallar e lou appoyar ny rougl.|Salt the strips of fish and push them into the sauce.
Y frigsoir covauclir e laiscar cinq minut, fin ag pescot sein just cogt.|Cover the pan and leave for five minutes, until the fish is just cooked.
Y repasc descovrir, appendr con y remanent ag vurt (ben y sunt calscon desirað) eð y saf jait dessur.|Uncover, add the rest of the herbs (or whichever amount suits) and cast the juice over the dish.
Le dar ne bol con pan dur.|Serve bowled with hardbread.
Tandic jo flanna ny bourg encontrau jo Mary.|It was as I ambled through town that I met Mary.
Ja sta la un band de figl corrent atras.|There was already a group of kids running to the other side.
Un hom au y vriðel jognt por alcun lumner yemois y cambr.|Someone had closed the curtains so no light would enter the bedroom.
Folker pendr tras port poð aer cordialessem dar a vossy repaðr.|Hanging ferns outside can make your home feel more welcoming.
Renduð connuðessem par y ci ouvr a Dufresne e Fayeda y dezein final de siecr settoç, l'oc apponment affirmau toð við aurn se formað ag moment de Creation.|Popularised by the works of Dufresne and Fayeda in the last decade of the seventeenth century, this theory asserted that all life had formed at the moment of Creation.
I parmaneu n'affirmant casc veunt prosequent crescoirn des gendr minuscr de lou (nommað zoia par Dufresne, valent noc oc broðiar con y benoç actual dy parol við unicasel descrint), lou meðes form minusclessem stant y generation grand-figl, et cetera.|It further stated that each successive generation grew from miniature versions of themselves (which Dufresne called zoia, not to be confused with our modern use of the term for one-case life), themselves containing yet-smaller forms for the grandchild generation, and so on.
Figur temporane un form human piquessem afont ne casel sperm mostrant illustrn l'oc apponment l'un eð y creinç y dou ig un maðr no sta for hum y babe (semnað dy paðr) la aðoint.|Contemporary diagrams showing a tiny human form inside a spermcase illustrate both this theory and the impression that the mother was merely the soil where the baby, planted by the father, grew.
Ci attriboint, problem de predestination innað coll'oc parceuçon—pu certan y ci rendoirn l'apponment abhorrent ben heres ny domain Augsbourger— y reclam pront (veyað d'al-Siddik l'ouvr 1696 Ag Figl a Zeno) sta y fait de recarnt un caðen infinið de zoia jamay picquessem postular, voluð hamtar ne casc animal mascr sur y Tar.|Setting aside issues of predestination inherent in this approach—though of course this rendered the theory anathema or even heretical in the Augsburg dominia—the immediate objection (see al-Siddik's 1696 work On the Children of Zeno) was that you would need to posit an infinite chain of progressively-smaller zoia to be present inside every male animal on the planet.
Sy parol tenen coler, ma jo vis un lousc ricotant aç ogl.|His words were angry, but I saw a glint of humour in his eyes.
Y traiscnant de curaçon Arnoutszen toc toll'ig histoir european.|The aftermath of Arnoutszen medicine affects all European history.
Y vriðel stan ny broccat y ci annað a sy paðr ramenant.|The curtains were made of brocade redolent of her father's generation.
Memorað vos y zoia cholera produgnt?|Do you remember which bacteria cause cholera?
Thomas refey sell'azig e sortoy ny colloir dy carrot, s'affignt all'aucoum a gent attenent descendr.|Thomas remade his shoes and stood up into the car's corridor, joining the throng of people waiting to disembark.
L'eç fenestr defassaurn, un termin actif revelant oc compos ne figur accapellað stivað sou laçploy por y temp noc idone eluïr.|The long windows descended, revealing a teeming stationful of hatted figures huddling under raincatchers to avoid the inclement weather.
Reðr lou spanoirn ardois scaut dessur con hour d'yenç eð y novel cottidian; Thomas descifrau uncos l'ambasctour Cambresc partenent pre y parol collaurn dessou dy pareiveðr.|Behind them stretched slates full of arrival times and the daily news; Thomas made out something about the Cambrick ambassador before the line slid under the sill.
Cos final y port dy carrot rollaurn atras, donc Thomas fleiçau y valigs e seveu l'eç autr sojournour sur y quarf.|At last the car doors slid open, so Thomas collapsed his suitcase and followed the other passengers out onto the platform.
L'ig coyenç accommet tan un pont a pieton.|That dam doubles as a pedestrian bridge.
Des fissau y bogloir, jo le pris deur y foy .|When the kettle began to whistle I took it out of the fire.
Sell'ouvr es y cim de parform temporane.|His work is the pinnacle of contemporary theatre.
Vayað ny salon e scencheð tey un dragm a brandvin.|Go to the parlor and pour yourself a dram of brandy.
Cas final, posc toð y ci loit e combat, toð y calver e dolour, y majon livr de Faraje beut pog solution a Drico.|In the end, after all the struggles and fighting, all the strife and pain, Faraje's library offers Driquo few answers.
La no son nien ny majon oy for memoir—e tan gast de deyaç partið jaçol.|There is nothing in the library now but memories—and ghosts of duties long passed.
Drico es stivað de noc savir, e stivaðessem de desirar savir.|Driquo is tired of not knowing and more tired of wanting to know.
Eç dezein a i phantasm aurfiað porseut con titr e nom l'echovant afont com campan slognað, le convoccant a repaðrir an loy seyon inconnuð, un loy—l'es ençant a comprendr—jamay volent luy parmettr saluð.|For decades he has chased golden phantoms with a title and a name ringing in his mind like distant church bells, calling him home towards a place he doesn't know, and which now he's starting to finally realise isn't ever going to welcome him.
Luy es y Prophet, e com un joun corsour, l'a sy sona luïð.|He's the Prophet, and like a boy running an errand, he's played his part.
E parisc ig l'oc es l'entertað seyon jamay saut.|And it seems that that is all he will ever know.
Y Minister a Famigl va m'accaçar sell'ascuranç a mort!|The Ministry for Family must send me her death certificate!
Sorgað, monteð sur y vec e scandað y scagl aç banc ovart.|Stand up, get on the bus and climb the stairs to the open-air seats.
Lou dou accapellaurn e sorteurn accougl.|They both put on their hats and left together.
Y cat au y novel tas battuð dy pareiveðɾ.|The cat had knocked the new vase off the windowsill.
Nos approismau y matier com Ferenc (Geometriæ Inquadrabiles, 1819) par casc concreuçon des axiom dað admettent.|We take the approach of Ferenk (Geometriæ Inquadrabiles, 1819) in allowing any concrescence of given axioms.
Por y continuum cos particuler caurreu nos uncos starchessem: dou concreuçon calscon (y cinq soumission enonçað ne capparol 7 suffignt) son de natur jammel.|For the continuum in particular we will obtain something stronger: any two concrescences (satisfying the five propositions listed in Chapter 7) are, essentially, identical.
Un bustr senglessem vil y method illustrar.|A simpler example will demonstrate the principle.
Nos eu idea naðeu a mission s des font W vars bers X; l'oc attriboy a casc sodal ne W l'un ne X.|We have an intuitive idea of a function s from source W to target X, assigning to each element of W one from X.
Por l'oc mission costroir com cougl manifest, nos poum calscon de dou noçon ja noscon vis benoçar.|To construct this function explicitly as a set, we may make use of either of two notions we have already seen.
Primer, nos definisc ig mission son porçonment dy som W+X la afont casc porçon inclun un sodal exact des X.|First, we define functions to be partitions of the disjoint union W⊔X in which each part contains precisely one element of X.
Cossy cogleu nos con un x ne X y cougl (voit, possibr!) de w ne W, suffignt ig w↦x.|Thereby we collect with an x in X the (possibly empty!) collection of w in W for which w↦x.
L'yenç ag fest sauvaç resors y bourg kieð.|The arrival of the wild party enlivened the quiet town.
Nos erau aziant sou laçploy, l'yenç ag vec attendent.|We stood at the shelter, waiting for the bus to arrive.
Vazdara! Jo's stivað de vossy connardaç!|Fuck off! I'm fed up with your fucking bullshit!
Dou picq najel yemen ag quarf, cargað de pescot.|Two small boats arrived a the quay, laden with fish.
"Cal som nos faint?" rou Jovanna, tandic Marta met ogl sur rig a immoubr, cascun parmy ne stat demolið com picq.|"What are we doing?" Jovanna asks, while Marta eyes a row of buildings, all of them in pretty bad repair.
"Bors coglent," respon Marta, y mur sgardant.|"Gathering funds," Marta answers, looking at the wall.
L'es sanessem a paravant, ma ancour es i fortessem nommað veil a joun, donc… "Jovanna, promet mey uncos," dig i serious.|She is healthier than she was, but she's still on the greying side of old, so… "Jovanna, promise me something," she says seriously.
"Atten noc all'oc tey meðes fin a star treç eld ben may."|"Don't try this yourself until you're at least thirteen."
Y joun fay sclar d'ogl.|The kid blinks at her.
"Jo poð noc contar?"|"I can't count?"
Marta soupir.|Marta sighs.
"Jo vil ig t'instroir—remain ac."|"I'll teach you—just stay here."
Y doncel luy da for un sgart bempart comfus—soulor laisc un clamur increint la Marta approism y mur ne corrent preuç—sy pie ponent dessur por se jactar ne haut, tout com i faye deur við plusour e—|The girl just gives her a mostly puzzled look—then lets out an incredulous sound as Marta takes the wall at a slight jog, putting her foot on it to push upwards, just like she used to several lifetimes ago and—
Zo, i's—ovrant concret.|Oh, it's—actually working.
Mell'instroyour azia ag sougl e me sgarda y viol crullar.|My teacher would stand in the door and watch me play the viol.
Vos erreð l'eç model concrescr pre lou mostrar ag concegl.|You'll have to prototype these designs before you show them to the council.
Ne sclar d'ogl l'au y quist coglt eð i faye lign a sy maðr.|In an instant he'd picked up the phone and was calling his mother.
L'aðelent scoutau y soumission de Marc lon parol.|The teacher listened to Mark's suggestion without comment.
Lizabet Jarry tras a caf bas y port façad all'edifiç Portrait Jorn Ovrað, porseut afont de vent agr sy reflex jacquot battent vars sy visaç.|Lizabé Jarri ducks through the front doors of the Weekday Portrait building, chased in by a brisk wind that slaps her coat lapels into her face.
L'oc vent fo equal ingraçant ag cavel; l'atten a se rendr coglt coll'un man, sy caffay e tarsc annonç e valigs jonglant coll'autr.|It's been equally merciless with her hair; she attempts to make herself presentable with one hand, juggling her coffee and namecard and suitcase with the other.
N'agent cossy i quin apen test a test ag majortað dy scavour, eç ayent se raðunað atorn y veil fontan ne mamour a plaç mi dy vesteul.|In the process she almost runs headlong into most of the scratchers, who have gathered around the old marble fountain in the hall.
Maud l'approism des cost, Lombard movent apart con spagl.|Maud sidles up beside her, shouldering Lombard out of the way.
"Jo saif ig l'eç te definisc y total, ma tu va noc yembr tart casc aubon," dig i, y caffay a Lizabet volant.|"I know it's all part of your thing, but you don't have to be late every morning," she says, stealing Lizabé's coffee.
"J'ignorau my lugclocq."|"I slept through my alarm."
Certan dy ci febiltað de Lizabet son luïð, ma sy mal gournanç d'hour es enter real; sy gyr cottidian n'a jamay hast pareïð con y ci dell'autr ny mont.|Some of Lizabé's foibles are an act, but the poor timekeeping is entirely natural; her internal clock has never fallen into sync with the rest of the world.
"Cal cainç es avenent?"|"What's going on?"
Dericq ençau a corrir preuç, eð Alicia mognessem poðe apen hast pareïr.|Derick broke into a jog, and the shorter Alicia could barely keep up.
Jo vil descombr posc l'oc capparol finir.|I'll go to bed after I finish this chapter.
Nossy picq navel pareyeu hast admirabr coll'ig vostr.|Our little ship kept up admirably with your one.
Veg alcot jo dig a mell'ivan d'ovrar, ðe voun un regul trovar a rompr.|However much I tell my kids to behave, they find some rule to break.
Acujan pausau un moment de scoc, e soulor appoyau afaç.|Acujan stopped momentarily in surprise, then he pressed on.
Deð apar, Monnir, façau repasc.|Come on, Munir, let's have dinner.
Nos desbroðiau accougl.|We get along.
Tu's faur eð animant ne collocq.|You're clever and interesting to talk to.
Jo poð oc luïr, faur eð animant ne collocq.|I can pretend to be clever and interesting to talk to.
De cal sfondra i?|What's the harm?"
Monnir cogleu un scaumel dy tablaur eð ençau a le movir lon solcið, ogl a Acujan pognant.|Munir picked up a pen from his desk and started idly fidgeting with it, drawing Acujan's eye.
"Es l'idea te venuð, ig j'ay cos sengr y sunt exact d'amigtað colleger ratiocinað, oc recas por tu ouvr y laboriosessem, eð ig cossy jo so stant tell'aðombracer cruel?"|"Has it occurred to you that I've simply determined the precise level of camaraderie required for you to work most effectively, and have in this way been callously manipulating you?"
"I fo, ne vertað," sboccau Acujan.|"It actually had," smirked Acujan.
"Jo decideu l'ig m'attrag cos largecer."|"I decided that would be incredibly attractive."
Val ty dragment doubr y bustr equallessem com possibr.|Your drawing should copy the example as closely as possible.
Vostrell'heir compren noc meðes y detagl naðeu a histoir.|Your son doesn't even understand the basic details of history.
Y bal seyon lançað traseu direct y fenestr.|The ball she threw went straight through the window.
Y Deviant spornaurn majortaðer accostur "coglt".|For the most part, the Deviants rejected "presentable" clothing.
Just comoscon y dannesc attriboyeu tonneðr ag raug a Thor, cossy meðes poum nos figurar yonoscon venoirn y cont d'un grant centuir ben host cauç de gast, covallant e criant tras y stereom.|Just as the Danes attributed thunder to the wrath of Thor, so too we can imagine whence came the tales of a great army or hunting party of ghosts, riding and shouting across the night sky.
Y vent hurlant, val admettr, appariscn noc tan autr a ci hurl de can cauçour.|The howling winds, after all, sound not so different from the howls of hunting dogs.
Entr hammel istrað a norð de Humbr e toun covart de ney alpin, paregl son y suajon maternal dað a casc ivan candon oin ðe y Gran Cauç Ragnt (ben y Herlathing, ben y Wütendes Heer) passant dessur: remanir afont, ogl tornar, attendr outem de creir ðe no sin la.|From isolated hamlets north of the Humber to snow-blanketed Alpine villages, the motherly advice given to all children when they hear the Great Wild Hunt (or the Herlathing, or the Wütendes Heer) passing overheard is the same: stay inside, look away, do your best to pretend they aren't there.
Scholer majortaðer reconnoscn oy y cont pouvr d'un cauç gaster divers aun un stemn unic d'antictað, n'Europ toð cas (y racont lanhiaçan comportant son certan desjognt).|Most scholars today accept that the various folk traditions of a ghostly hunt stem from a single ancient source, at least in Europe (the similar Lanhyatian stories are of course unrelated).
Ig degnant, ðe graçaurn y domn ant braç coupað apart.|Nonetheless, they pitied the woman whose arm was cut off.
A Cordoba temporane no sta fagl y við a scavour.|The life of a Cordoba journalist at that time was hard.
Eð vos y grant ouvr ne mamour vis, oc fait de Lorenzo?|Have you seen the great marble sculpture, the one Lorenzo made?
Ig crevoscr a my gyr cottidian enter foutuð.|Last night completely ruined my body clock.
Redrouth se pen de mençon.|Redrouth is all about lying.
Jainç forcer nastiscn cos fondaminal de parol intoccabr.|Power-plays are built upon the foundations of intangible words.
Parol accaç gent a var, a parol poun un var stoppar, test laçar, cour rompr.|Words send men to war, and words can stop a war, can turn a head, can break a heart.
Ny conjuraçon parfait de parol assey forç, e l'un ant capabiltað total sur parol luïsc aðombracer dy Cort a Redrouth.|Power lies in the perfect manipulation of the words, and the one whose mastery of words is complete dominates the Court at Redrouth.
L'oc maistr no's Rey Jundreth, ni alcun dell'ambasctour zucarrað, ni baron a largeç de collocq.|The master is not King Junderth, nor any of the silver-tongued diplomats, or verbose barons.
L'es y Prinç Heriter Arthur, duellist e tarnaç, degnant alcun hom saif: l'oc es sy grandessem victoir jusc oy.|It is the duellist taverner Crown Prince Arthur, though nobody knows it: this is his greatest triumph to date.
Ma sou ciel all'acr d'addoçment, glay ne man, toð sy tact e commission exact de parol son inutr.|But on the training field, a sword in his hand, all his diplomacies and precise choices of words are useless.
Avant y caller, i poð moment brey e briglant y sona de Prinç souvr.|Before the knights, he can for brief and shining moments lay down the mask of Prince.
Vail noc attendr, i te sporn total!|Don't bother, she's way out of your league!
Deð apar e tu broucara my grand-aldr accarnt!|Come on, you'll enjoy visiting my grandparents!
D'alcun sunt a amigtað colleger vil jo Marc supportar.|No amount of camaraderie will get me to tolerate Mark.
Pos jo scaumel t'emprontar? Mell'un es repars.|Could I borrow one of your pens? I've lost mine.
Por sgart laðessem, Ausbagn ag siecr docem ados fay veraçter cort dy Jarlað Sothbaran; a 1190 saut es Jarl Steign asseye l'annað enter ag bourg coster, y majon veil a Heitriç tramettent ag fraðr jundr.|For context, the Ausbagn of the late twelfth century is the de facto seat of the County of Sothbar; by 1190 Count Steven is known to have resided year-round in the coastal town, bequeathing the old house in Heitriç to his younger brother.
Ausbagn se situant all'un cost dy Stuer Rustig surcou ant valour eðegler immens, cos militer e marcer y dou.|The location of Ausbagn on one side of the Rustigh Strait proved to be of immense strategic value, both militarily and economically.
Y Gran Delug Fly ne 1171 landau y largeç de Frigs Bas apart, e devastau Willemy enter.|The Great Flie Flood of 1171 swept away much of Lower Frisia, and was devastating for all of Willemy.
L'oc no sta mendrem dec y Duc, luy Lovis y Haut, sta n'Amstel ig moment, eð er occis par y delug.|This was not least because the Duke, one Lovis the Tall, was in Amstel at the time, and was killed in the deluge.
Toð cas final, Ausbagn sta dezein plusour apres l'ouçon fagl de havan por y marcant calscon najant des l'eðegl dannesc tras y domain drengoçan vars Spagn e l'aur dy Miterran.|In any case, Ausbagn was for several decades afterward the obvious choice of harbour for any trader moving from the Danish lands through the Drengot domain and onward to Spain and the riches of the Middlesea.
Y tablaur a my maðr er cargað haut de regest e delt facsimile.|My mother's worktable was piled with papers and tablet reproductions.
L'instroyour au un sboc y fascandessem.|The teacher had the most annoying smirk.
Nos attenm y rasgatto dell'annað ant untal avidtað.|We await the year's conclusion with such eagerness.
L'oc delt trey mil annað eld surcas enombr a issent de vatr.|This three-thousand-year-old tablet turned out to be a list of values of sine.
L'aðendr a tarm vec forn eið doutr posc y rout novel ovroy.|The bus stops' schedules were obsoleted by the new road.
Tramou aun tagl eð asmuth y dou.|A vector has both size and direction.
Cal porra balanç intermanir ag tramou ny porçonment?|How will we make up for the budget shortfall?
Cascif parmist vos coronc remainn e lou blasmaust noc?|Why did you permit pretenders to remain without censure?
Yeðrot zajadau scanoirn y mur ne bric.|Variegated ivy grew up the brick walls.
Ða gent oc saun, y sar marcer dourra mal.|If people find out about this, the trade network will be affected badly.
Ðe aurn cogmað fait ag manneç mauser mivocan.|They had gone on holiday in the sun belt of Mivock.
Hour alcot son ty cosvour disceint?|How long have your cousins been missing?
Comburnç no's for detaxion con ignifex magn hastous.|Burning is just a very fast reaction with oxygen.
Y sodal all'oc roncaf mortal harmonen noc.|The pieces of this murder mystery didn't fit together.
Loy paregl ny cour es ajoutað de bon romanç kevlar.|The same part of the heart delights in a good heist story.
Nos n'eu sgart for mozað sull'enigma ig y smaraut sperisceurn.|Our understanding of the mystery of the vanishing emeralds is fragmentary.
Dur sta savir ða l'au y festeul kiglað ben scap en fait.|It was hard to say if he'd missed the party or escaped it.
Sot es toscivr acatar sec lon bouðr ben queimasc.|It's silly to buy a sandwich dry without butter or cream cheese.
Alcot y bel nau, tu pos ja traiçon me dar.|Whatever you say, you might yet betray me.
Ðe amn queldar tras port candon cay bel.|They like to dine outside when it's fine out.
Ðe ern armað a pont costroir enter ne far jout.|They were tasked with building a bridge of cast iron alone.
I dis se pondr voud a me rajondr candon y dou vendraun nos sautellar.|She said that she was looking forward to seeing me when they next come to visit.
Eð i souscris con nau d'amour.|And she signed off with love.
Vanna sors de sy caðer, aulau reðr Marin atorn, e luy mis y man sur y spal, lou pognant.|Vanna got up from his chair, walked round behind Marin, and put his hands on his shoulders, gripping them.
"Jo te le dis. Lausc? Jo te dis ig i n'aye recas for d'hour may."|"I told you. See? I told you she just needed time."
Marin pos y man dessur a l'ig de Vanna, y deit angost spanent tras y crougl varrigt.|Marin put his hand on top of Vanna's, spreading his slim fingers over the hardened knuckles.
Tu poð bogr cossirar deïbr ig jo comfy ty tesmogn ða a plaç poð jo en deskeðar vars foltað.|You can't expect me to take your word for things when I could work myself into a frenzy about them instead.
A cal bon noscon yent?|Where would that get us?
Nos sereu tout brogmoð beint e tort dell'ivan pascent.|We'll all be drinking mead and eating Christmas pie.
Haucetr e corf le parlocn, symbol auspecer intermanent.|The hawks and ravens around him are symbols of prophecy.
Ma ja es David y diabr d'annel portant; sell'ensignment haucetr e vign lousc des y brant cant ðe s'appenn contr y mur, tait soutan.|But David still has the damn ring, its hawk-vine engraving catching the firelight as they lean against the wall, suddenly silent.
Ag moment just ig Marc yem scið l'oc saluð (sey vray l'es cossy nommabr; sur sy jalicq ancour sechiscent es sanc des cavir occis) harmon bogr coll'ig seyon creut cos primer, luy es i dont y dors caf appoyað vars y mur.|Just as Mark is realizing that this welcome (if it can be called that; he has blood from being murdered still drying on his jalick) is of an entirely different key than what he first thought, he is the one with his back up against the wall.
David es tojorn le tenent pognað, ðe son combat parsount e soulor—|David is still clutching onto him, they're fighting and then—
Soulor—|Then—
Soulor, posc cent annað, ðe no le son.|Then, after a hundred years, they are not.
Vitriol scencað sur calamin nastisc copros a jast.|Pouring vitriol on calamine produces jast's cuprose.
Reuvað entarn neðan vos caurreð tout mephit!|Come back inside so you don't all catch a chill!
Ðe voltisceurn nell'askouð irront, tragç carnt.|They lingered in the cracked vault, looking for clues.
Brackil sveil ny forest, gien pos contr mos sec, uncos dur—un ranscel—sy peitrin appoussað afont.|Brackil wakes up in the forest, his cheek against dry moss, something hard—a branch—digging into his chest.
La son fougl e racin eð arp sou y man, sy deit fassað atorn.|There are leaves and roots and grass under his hands, winding into his fingers.
Allors dessur la son aucel kisiscent.|Somewhere above him, there are birds, chirping.
Posc un moment por ig allongar, eið de confujon eð un gendr cullig eð affauðað a thaum, i reu a faç haut, torchent cos fatuous por y ranscel deslocar des dessou.|After a moment lying there in confusion and a strange, faded sort of wonder, he turns to lay on his back, awkwardly squirming to get the branch out from under him.
Cay real un forest—i se trou ne forest concret, ant briscel a sy scert eð un canougf a foglaç dessur, lumner de sol parlocant.|It really is a forest—he's in an actual forest, with bushes to the left of him and a canopy of leaves above him, sunlight screening through.
Toll'oc aun aer e son real, y fougl hurislant, y mos dessou le moglent com picq, y bris le toccotant a menton.|It feels and sounds real, the rustling of leaves, the slight dampness of the mosses under him, the touch of breeze on his chin.
Ðe aun meðes fler real.|It even smells real.
Y fraðr colombaurn dou vars y magler.|The two brothers went straight to the butcher's.
No se poð ig vos affighað scorç dalassin demay.|You cannot have added too much cinnamon.
Casc ivan nell'amaçgat reçoirn un bricot dy colluy indrec.|Every child in the nursery received a gift from the charity.
Fuyo joun ern cantant, aziant sull'eç ranscel.|Young robins were singing, stood on the branches.
Havan son haut parmy loy outem por volour.|Ports are one of the best places for thieves.
Toð gent la es hastant, commovent e se peyaçant atorn.|Everyone there is in a hurry, bustling about and smacking into each other.
La son y marcant desirant for repaðrir cas lou; maðr annoyað attenent a lourell'ivan appreuçar.|There are the tired businessmen just wanting to get home; harried mothers trying to corral their kids.
Tant de diversion e sorc a assistr coin bempart a gent de cur demay dar ag vertað ig ðe vien de denir osc de rouvaç.|So many distractions and concerns keep most people from paying too close attention to the fact they've just had their money lifted.
Bempart a gent.|Most people.
Nial sta treç annað eld, y joun trencsachet outem all'oc cost dy Becovin e cos enter outr foutuð.|Nial was thirteen years old, the best youth pickpocket this side of the Becouin and totally, completely fucked.
"Hau la," dis y segr sy vain pognant par mordaç inscapabr.|"Hey now," said the man who held his wrist in an unbreakable grip.
L'aye son broscan eð ogl ricotant tandic i sgarda ig Nial attene a fugr ne varmant.|His accent was Brosick, and his eyes were laughing as Nial tried to squirm away.
Y domn voinaçal portant ayen y connocry ris ne camp abat.|The women in armourcloth had transformed the ice dance into a battlefield.
Y refectoir vença manoscart a vigt morac eð ambrosc.|The lunch-house sold Morrack-Ambrosian fusion food.
A fin ig tu caif y livr teyon rovað, jo calmau ag varous fin all'augtanç.|So you'd get the book you wanted, I stayed at the shop until it arrived.
Adagle lou scoutau noc cascun e follau afaç, e com effeit y tel metal rescau a biasc, y dou mitað paupieðr faint ny mur eð un roum fasc revelant la doutr.|Adelaide ignored them all and stepped forward, and in reaction the metal slab split diagonally, the two halves sliding away and revealing a dark space beyond.
Tandic Herret eð y jammel se sgardaurn confus, l'entrau tras sougl, y bojay leyant haut por ig illuminar situað doutr y port cullig.|As Harriet and the twins shared looks of confusion, she stepped inside, lifting up the candle to illuminate what lay beyond the strange door.
Soulor sta Adagle pront comprenent.|Then Adelaide promptly understood.
"No spou," murmurau i, ne l'entarn veint.|"Surely not," she muttered, as she saw the interior.
L'intermane tout metal ligs: gendr colloir voutað, de form trelamner, con—vagscrit parcanç—sur y mur.|It was all smooth metal: a sort of vaulted corridor, triangular in shape, with—perhaps nameplates—on the walls.
Ny vesteul polið lontanessem la stan—|Further down the polished vestibule were—
"No spou," redis i partenendessem, dec i vis ig la stant—tras y grant hal, posc y ci tablaur stragn e scaðr vogt, la sta un fenestr.|"Surely not," she said again more pointedly, as she saw what was there—across the large hall, past the odd tables and glass frames, there was a window.
Un fenestr titan ant un vogt fosc doutr.|An enormous window with dark, empty space beyond it.
Sauf ig vertaðer i no sta fosc, noc enter.|Except it wasn't dark, not quite.
Le relusern tan mil a stel.|It was lit by thousands of stars.
Jarry accendað dan aer cordial ag salon.|Pottery lamps gave the parlour a welcoming feel.
"Ja," acquïsceu l'ansc, movent por sy nucq frottar.|"Fine," the angel acquiesces, reaching to rub the back of his neck.
"Ja, cal es ig meyon deut fair?"|"Fine, what should I do?"
Cos final l'es pesant a l'oc Creation gournar luy meðes; ma ac tan l'es commant carnt, sorc dant a Bologin con—uncos autr.|At last he's thinking of enforcing his own control of this Creation; even then he looks for orders, which is concerning and—something else.
"Dayað mey lengaç," dis i.|"Give me languages," Bulodgin says.
"Pardon?"|"I'm sorry?"
"Vos eð me resors an hour eð un loy dont y lengaç n'ay jo nien—donc dayað mey lou," dis Bologin, ant may presumenç ny vois all'ig seyon sentið.|"You have remade me in a time and place of whose languages I know nothing—so give me them," Bulodgin says, with more confidence in his voice than he feels.
Lonc y pog stoir seyon oïð, l'oc sey un rescaunç magn may frailessem a cascun ja acavað par Josue.|From the few tales he's heard, this would be far more delicate a rewriting than Josue has yet managed.
Josue luy scut un sgart increint e Bologin luy resgart toð rigiscent.|Josue gives him an incredulous glance and Bulodgin looks back, steady.
"Vos eð un hom forgað ne pieðr; scur es ig vos posseð l'instroir a parolar."|"You have made a man from stone; surely now you might teach him to speak."
Posc un demy hour, vastel scoclettað magn demay eð un acquetta de limon scencað auvorn, Zoe descenoy y novel leyour peripaton quaucant e gasau y gið embrostað.|Half an hour, far too much shockled cake and a generous glass of limmon acquetta later, Zoe strode out of the new unmanned lifter and peered at the ornate signposts.
Y cla ne man aye inscaunç sarvent d'un auçel fylau eð un catr keren ne lettranç net, e donc aulau i lonc y colloir combinant fin a sy port yembr, stant impos ny mur cos soutil.|The key in her hand was helpfully inscribed with a fullaw bird and the number four in neat script, so she turned down the corresponding corridor until she found her door, set discreetly into the wall.
Entarn, y bevey a cambr (vertaðer, noc magn may a picq salon e quelt n'un eðegl) sta apprestað lonc y barstant novessem de Morac, toð pieðry revelað con tapeçment e vriðel penent.|Inside, the set of rooms (really, not much more than a small parlour and a bed in an alcove) was decorated in the latest Morrack fashions, all exposed stonework draped in tapestries and curtains.
L'augher ag cogn aye meðes ans ne form de naðr.|The ewer in the corner even had a handle in the shape of a viper.
Y cambr hur noscon dað avars stan bolegs e capaç.|The rooms that we rented were tidy and spacious.
Cal voun ðe por lourell'erraç idoneïsar?|What will they do to fix their mistakes?
Eð hour alcot es caint y storcment?|And for how long has the blackmail been going on?
"Façau follanç all'area fruy pre un douçur cascun triar ou?" dis Benjamin.|"Let's take a spin on the dance floor before dessert, shall we?" Benjamin said.
Luy e Martha aurn toð y desc delið, e futil enter sta y residu dy collocq attendr a prolongar—lonc y bustr ig, y concið de Lucas parisce cos implausibr s'accommettr megl a sell'un.|He and Martha had cleared their plates, and there was no point prolonging what remained of the conversation—in that respect Lucas' date seemed impossibly to be going better than his.
Yvet sta toð cas sona luyent de cur dar ag monolog de Lucas.|Yvette was at least pretending to pay attention to Lucas' monologue.
Martha accordau, stant clar yent an conclujon cosvour.|Martha agreed, having clearly come to a similar conclusion.
Le souprenent, y domn surcou fort fruyour, ant pas leger e gournanç d'hour scur.|To his surprise, she proved a good dancer, with light steps and a good sense of timing.
Tandic ençau y cançon sevent, i vis ig Yvet oncau Lucas all'area fruy.|As the next song started, he saw Yvette dragging Lucas onto the dance floor.
Benjamin parceveu n'approvant ig i luy tenoy man distr con pogn fatuous e skassant—y compromis seyon fair accougl dec Lucas refusau y pie d'Yvet piestar.|Benjamin noted with approval that he held her right hand in an awkward, crushing grip—the compromise they'd reached over Lucas' unwillingness to tread on her feet.
Surcas au y fait ig degnant i volois pront eð allagr se fornir d'aer issugt, i spornau skiseç mancar.|Apparently, while he had no objection to being dull, he drew the line at clumsy.
Benjamin apponoy ja oc eus.|Benjamin supposed it was just as well.
Defait de skiseç volois noc un aer de vertað por toð gent ayent le vis ne combat.|Feigned clumsiness wouldn't have been believable to anyone who had seen him fight.
Un complet boncop eð un camis fossettað noc obstroint, Lucas farau fort ne fruyant—ligs e graçous.|Despite the cheap suit and the wrinkled shirt, Lucas fit in on the dance floor—sleek and graceful.
Parcanç aðief ig Yvet cossiraus valir sy collocq souvar par toð y tædium.|Maybe enough so that Yvette would consider it worth suffering through his conversation.
Y sartour er un fleus neir embrostant.|The dressmaker was embroidering a black velvet.
My fraðr dessoclau y castel blader meyon costroit.|My brother knocked over the house of cards I built.
Façað plu stancour a my nuçal!|Stop meddling in my wedding!
Ma y majortað (catr part ne cinq, accordant lonc y narrað annual recentessem des l'Edifiç meðes) a zucar consunt n'Istr Boral es recoglt cos vecintaðer.|But the majority (four parts in five, in accordance with the latest annual reports from the Institute itself) of sugar consumed on Borland is produced in the vicinity.
Toll'eç preu bustr tesmogn de gent scarob betraver nastiscent son ag siecr seç; a veir particuler y scaunç in experientia de theorist willemesc Tewis Camigner, y natur douç e colour 'bilrod' seyon svoccað afont.|The first attestations of betraver syrup being produced are all in the sixteenth century; see for example the in experientia writings of Willem theorist Tewis Camigner, wherein the sweetness and 'billrod hue' of beet syrup are noted.
Scey pog evidenç de recoglenç commarcer d'ig noscon nommabr 'betraver tesqual' ne Willem durant y Rix Romannesc e l'interrouçon cohernt ny sar marcer.|There is little evidence of commercial production of what we might call 'natural betraver' in Willem during the Romantic Wars and the concomitant disruption to the trade mesh.
Qualtað piour a doit ayent cloistau alcun ort a peðenç real vars l'oc matier.|Its inferiority as compared to cane hindered the growth of any real demand for the substance.
Par surcresc, stemn usual a betraf cavibr prell'accensment de Pentros ne dezein 1730 contene parcanç zucar lonc for un part n'ogtant, fort picquessem a doit.|Moreover, usual varieties of beet before the Pentrose survey of the 1730s would contain perhaps one part in eighty sugar, far lower than cane.
Y gent n'Ausçagm smoutaurn desig l'occijon.|The Ausçagm public rioted because of the murder.
Sell'amig er l'œcumen sovemblant cant nos pascau.|His friend was sketching the surroundings as we ate.
Alcun hom au y lamp fornið con zygom.|No-one had installed a switch for the light.
Y mençon ig remaneus un Empir Theudesc fo sevelið ne grauf jos y cadavr dy preu Reyaum Saxon, l'eiðel y dynasty Hogbrocken appartenent stant diminoit vars lourell'eðegl fondominal amont ne Lepzi e Magdebourg.|The fiction of a surviving German Empire was laid to rest with the corpse of the first Kingdom of Saxony, with the domain of the Hoghbrocken dynasty reduced to their core lands upstream in Lepzi and Magdeburg.
Y nou-redoit Marcgrau Baldr de Saxony, temporane no stant for catr annað eld, cou cos comprensibr par megl manouvr dy Stadbund smargent.|The newly-reduced Margrave Baldur of Saxony, being only 4 years old at the time, was understandably outmanœuvred by the nascent Stadbund.
Ma y ci polity-colluy nommað com y Stadbund, y Samslutning ben y Collijon Norðer cascun (nos veim usual ne scaunç latin collisio theodisc) creurn noc, lon digr, ex nihilo all'aubon dy siecr catorç.|But the guild-states known variously as the Stadbund, the Samslutning or the North Collision (we see in Latin documents usually collisio theodisc) did not, of course, appear fully-formed at the dawn of the fourteenth century.
Nos poum y racin de concort entr citað deut, peðaç eð autr parsoument coyençant furtivir jusc y siecr doç tost.|We can trace the roots of intercivic contracts restricting tariffs, tolls and other fees back to the early twelfth century.
Jo sta spait demay a porsief luy fair.|I was too scared to run after her.
Gent ern autoschedon faint a dou lonc y torg clojonnað.|People were sparring in pairs around the private square.
Pre finisceu y belem, trey hom ancour forn mort.|By the end of the scene three more people were dead.
Toð ratiocination convoluð com y ci noscon cossirað jusc oy nell'oc capparol arra pres certan doum damnað, for meðes dec—lonc vegl refrain leonesc—un veskit es inkintabr sur un doçan d'aguil.|Any scheme which is as convoluted as the ones we have seen so far in this chapter is almost certainly doomed, if only because—as they say in Leon—one cannot knit a veskit on a dozen needles.
Conjuraçon criminal partenent, nos porreu a plaç l'astuç dy stel original ne masquira Matthias o Grallon sevir: "Vayað noc vars y Lun por un Jorala accarr".|In the case of criminal plots, we might instead heed the advice of the original icon of masquira Matthias o Grallon: "Do not go to the moon to acquire a Jorala".
Casc pas e conjuraçonnour ancour poun un pognt a sfondranç surcair, e nos parceveu nullig alcun illustration parfaitessem dell'oc axiom a ny decadenç dy staddomain awasoucondesc.|Every new step, every added conspirator is a potential collapse point, and nowhere is this principle more perfectly illustrated than the tale of the downfall of the Awasúconda staddomain.
Situað amont (deg meco atorn derim tras y Fastig Camboscung deur y veðerrem treborth nommað Parnaven) sur y banc dy floy Awasou, l'oc region sta un sodal par comparaçon tart a y band d'instançment enajant jogndr lonc y colon de Cappatia auster.|Situated upstream (several miles inland across the Camboshung Ridge from the older seaport town of Parnaven) on the banks of the Awasú, this region was a relatively late member of the band of export-based settlements along the spine of eastern Cappatia.
Saveð vos cal praxitel gravau y Macchine di Helio?|Do you know which sculptor carved the Machines of Helios?
Y gant distr a my gamma ayen un deðal pagnt ig.|My grandma's right glove had a thimble built-in.
J'er pol frigsant je ados cas mey.|I was frying chicken at home yesterday.
Noc obstroint l'er fait pog martial de character, Andreu ant sy ment indeslocabr a jainç e sepostion nonscalent vars tact naðeu vole dar ig jo fos incaint a carceration souvar entr y mur dy Castel Safford lon tarm, ben fin a i sceus me benoçar megl.|Though he was not particularly martial-minded, Andrew's uncompromising tactical nous and cavalier disregard for simple diplomacy meant I would likely languish as a prisoner at Safford Castle indefinitely, or until he could put me to some better use.
Val pog; y cambr sta calt cos bel degnant y morostað de janver tras port, ant un foy kirtant eudæmon sou tapeçment lonc un victoir markesc ancour descreint—j'appone—tandy y pardastr afont no sta bogr discernibr.|No matter; the room was warm despite the January gloom outside, a merrily-crackling fire under a long tapestry depicting—I assumed—another Markish victory, though it was anyone's guess against whom.
Ag mur atras, jo saveu des y clartað dy ci quarrel ig ðe forn cos recent affis all'oc ans veil, accas plausibr ne carganç des y hal dy praxitel bavarn.|On the other wall, the clarity of the panes suggested they were a recent addition to this old wing, possibly commissioned from the Bavarn masters.
Allors aye jo plusour fenestr parceut y veðr zajadau dy siecr derran tenent tojorn, un vert obægr surcaint just inequivalibr par y lumner a tijon.|Elsewhere I had noticed many windows still held the jackdaw glass of the previous century, in a sickly green that could not quite be offset with torchlight.
Nossy majon er costroit sur rout nacleu.|Our house was built on a sloping street.
L'eç bojay ne voncir acataust vos ou?|Was it you who bought these beeswax candles?
Y fraðr dou eurn cosogr com zachet.|The two brothers stuck together like glue.
POR SONDAÇ: Zaquesc Select poll'Avegl Felaver, par Axel fi Magno|IN REVIEW: Selected Refreshments for the Social Bee, by Axel fi Magno
Y capel commet dant ag volum derran de fi Magno des sy rig a livr cocinancer Select nos affirm ig no scey necun festeul, crevoscr eurað ben raðunanç sengr eð amiabr stant inaðelibr par un ouçon sagaç des l'oc gið.|The introduction to fi Magno's newest entry in his renowned Selected series of recipe books assures us that no soirée, no carrow's-eve and no simple friendly get-together cannot be improved with a judicious choice from this volume.
Eð indeniabr es ig l'oc tom a un tagl y stent de sy vangard doblant cos fagl, may a 300 method contenent ant tout entr tatou yarcer e scadom vorpal sur bachet.|And indeed, this tome is easily twice the size of any of its predecessors, containing over 300 recipes with everything from haskent tover to stack-die shadomes.
Vray fos jo my deut fugnt ða jo n'aus certan dell'eç method attis a cogr com mey; y kyriel a kynous appos par fi Magno ig vos arreð sou man no's irraçonabr demay, ma meðes ci parmy vous sceindessem derim posn desirar y vanc mar kiglar.|I would have been remiss not to try making a few of these recipes for myself; the range of ingredients that fi Magno supposes you have available is not too unreasonable, although those further inland may wish to avoid the seafood.
Nos flannaum pall'yarç colloir ant yeðrot parlocant.|We ambled down the pergola with ivy all around us.
Cu a l'oc ugnlac vorpal laiscað jos ty panner?|Who's left this diced onion next to the breadbin?
Vossy neuç cant d'un kyriel infalagover.|Your niece has an impressive singing range.
Appos tant—Amigòt degnau noc nos sarvir par un chronic mantenent—es ig sy regn durau ogtoç annað por sceus Menton garantir sy hereter triað vole soutien pres unanim recevir dy Concert, l'edifiç de legifiçour provençal ant form emprontað dell'oc veneçan.|It is also supposed—Amigòt did not do us the service of keeping a chronicle—that his rule lasted eighteen years to allow Menton to ensure his chosen successor enjoyed near-unanimous support of the Concert, the Provincial legislative house modelled after the Venetians'.
Sell'ouçon faïð Raimond Aurellex, ayent sy sour y jundressem mariðað e dont y fraðr Lohis fo mort cant i fey caf poll'assaut ag Battagl de Satillew, perisceu d'un mescanç caucer ne 1511 (eð y recordation commun noc obstroint, l'oc cainç particuler sta cos implausibr occijon).|His first choice Raimond Aurellex, who had married his youngest sister and whose brother Lohis had died leading the charge at the Battle of Satillew, died in a hunting accident in 1511 (and despite the popular understanding, this particular incident was likely not an assassination).
Toð case final, y Concert eligeu y cosvour de Menton, Antoin Amigòt, por y Concert gournar sou y cur glacent e giðanç martial de daus Sanz, Daniel Menton sell'influyenç issarnt lon dout apar magn posc i soloy ombisc cos nominal.|In the end, the Concert elected Menton's cousin Antoin Amigòt to lead the Concert under the close attention and martial guidance of daus Sanz, through whom Daniel Menton doubtless exercised his influence long after his nominal stepping down.
Jo no sta jamay sviðour de fic.|I've never been a fan of figs.
Nos creim vos desfayað y morrig goðamer acconnoscr.|We believe you'd prefer not to meet our bigoted aunt.
Vail l'ig quagl star y quagl pascent?|Should that quail be eating the curds?
Ða l'aus un curtel frivol cossirabr posseïð lor plausibr sta i volois le triað por aziar fier accougl, ma i no l'aye.|If she’d owned a gown that could be called frivolous she might have selected it to demonstrate solidarity, but she did not.
I mis sy collar y reloðessem, un rascou ne perl gran luy dað com bricot de Hulda, e pastisceu cos leger l'idea d'y magð assignar a sy cavel compondr n'un form minutiosessem, ma toverstau.|She donned her best necklace, a grain-pearl rascow that had been a gift from Hulda, and toyed with the idea of asking the maid to arrange her hair into something more elaborate, but lost her nerve.
No sceye un sorty for insolemn.|It was only an informal sorty.
Conrad vole creir ig i sta fol denuð.|Conrad would think she’d run mad.
Par sell'obstinacy tardisceu i jusc surcair y derran a entrar ny salon.|Her reluctance delayed her to the point that she was the last into the parlour.
Ja scey casc autr hom, casc gent taçoirn, e l'atmospher cant l'aulau afont portau toll'exuberanç fujonner d'un torvegl.|Everyone else was there, everyone was silent, and the atmosphere as she walked in had all the joie de vivre of a thunderstorm.
Nos vail tout un picq pog de fabr a nossy jorn.|We could all do with a bit less excitement in our lives.
Nos n'arreu magn vivirc neðan y scon vec kiglar.|We won't have much leeway to catch the second bus.
L'oc majon dien vabian closnauterrem casc annað.|This house gets more run-down every year.
"Or." Hemma parolau de vois kieð demay.|"Well." Hemma's voice was too calm.
"Vray dis jo incoïbr es traiçon.|"I did say it always ends in betrayal.
Por mell'envou, repars tu for oy calscon bravur exiguous teyon accomblabr zelous, ben es tu un pascaret trayour lonc y mesur?"|Out of interest, did you only now lose whatever excuse for a spine you possess, or have you been a treacherous little rat all along?"
I poðe noc y frigçon a Monick mesveir.|She couldn't miss Monick's flinch.
"Ja's indeniabr; sou ty man so jo clavir.|"Of course you have; you played me like a fiddle.
Ne vertað, jo vil toð adolanç te dar por y sona de credola lon art hamtar tan bel."|Truly, I must applaud your dedication to the role of hapless ingénue."
Marça se pleyau eç ogl.|Marça’s eyes narrowed.
"Vel le deniar, Monick."|"Surely you didn’t, Monick."
"Pu i poð noc, certan," dis Hemma cos brutal.|"Of course she did," Hemma said viciously.
"Bon Deu, Monick, val tu parform ne fabr.|"Really, Monick, you ought to be on the stage.
Ben ig tu laur plu ag tragçment e te dedey vars lucr fair con tell'experiç real.|Or give up the illustrations and dedicate yourself to selling what you’re actually good at.
Y majon de Camin d'Arquèr veln te benoçar lon vacillar, untal agreç a tu vars star benoçað."|They could use you on Camin d'Arquèr, for how good you are at being used."
Sbolognment sera toll'eç kynous cavir pront candon recas.|It must be a pain needing to have all these ingredients to hand.
Nos voum noc sy volary outrscac venjar ou?|Are we just going to ignore his brazen thievery?
Gam sgarant me cof donc j'enfugheu.|Wanderlust called me and so I ran away.
L'ouvr de Desselut vole remanir irreconnuð tras dou dezein apen (deut majortaðer ag scompigl dy Rix Democratic), e nell'eç annað i vole deïr y combat fugr vars Cantuer norman cos primer e soulor vars Provenç par Portingal.|Desselut's work would go unrecognised for nearly two decades (due predominantly to the disruption of the Democratic Wars), during which time she would be forced to flee first to Norman Kent and later to Provence, via Portingale.
Cant l'er ac sojornant ençau i a correspondr con y mathematorg Raymond al Moustafa, oc stant temporane hamtant ne Barcelon sou y patronisment dy Duc d'Aragon.|It was in these years that she began corresponding with mathematician Raymond al Mustafa, who was at the time resident in Barcelon under the Duke of Aragon's patronage.
Lour y lettr nos offriscn un parcevet queglant a methodic primal, ma meðes y dou s'envoloirn may ag ci cohernç issent por við.|Their letters offer a tantalising glimpse into early methodics, although both were more interested in the implications for life.
Desselut ratiocinau ig exist un lengaç vital (parmy sy scaunç a luy i le nommau y Parol Divin) present ny ci casel dy corp.|Desselut inferred the existence of a vital language (in her own writing she called it the Divine Word) present in the cases of the body.
Alcun hom sceu y scompigl redugr ny vesteul.|Nobody managed to calm the chaos in the foyer.
Jo vel hur dar an udomintel.|I would like to hire a babysitter.
Nos broucaum un crevoscr vunnastr accougl.|We spent a merry evening together.
…Pomona volois jamay poðir expatiar con tal experiç ag them dy congerie continu de combat mendevan zajadau, ci oïð certan aðief ent par Emilla des sy fraðr y jundressem deur for hour l'oc aubon.|…Pomona would never have been able to speak so knowledgeably on the subject of the ongoing congeries of Mendevan wars, about which Emilla had heard quite enough from her youngest brother that very morning.
Y lampionnour fo venuð e partið tras y jogntur vars Zanca de Molinero prell'hour yon y covalcat a connoscenç de Pomona ençau a vrimnar apart e lor collocq picquesseum sceurn ortellir ig ne cognit.|The lamplighter had been and gone round the juncture onto Zanca de Molinero by the time Pomona's cavalcade of cognoscences began to wind down and smaller conversations managed to sidle in unnoticed.
Emilla sorgoy des sy hamarr denent incommodessem pres y fenestr, recomponoy y ci kynous y fatuosessem ne sy spallot alað (cos recent rafayattað ne form voinaçaller sou y man de car Valeria, un denzan repaðrið d'un parrinment ne Napr l'eç barstant 'disimpecciabile' may cascun carnt), e captau y remarc de sy glovir Zoe…|Emilla arose from her increasingly-uncomfortable seat by the window, rearranged the fiddliest parts of her winged shoulder pieces (recently retailored in the armourcloth style by her darling Valeria, a repatriate from an expedition to Naples in search of ever-more 'disimpecciabile' fashions), and caught the eye of her sister-in-law Zoe…
J'ignor trevogt demay poll'oc scarrad yarçer.|I don't know enough voidtales for this crossword.
Tre moðnaut ern y cordamn laðrant.|Three sailors were climbing in the rigging.
Dou aragn son y platcouf flaðrant.|Two spiders are climbing on the ceiling.
Sceyen a coul fix chrestan venent ag Dioces Boral (eð aval y Preu Reyaum d'Istr Boral) dy ci annað tardessem ny siecr cinq e vars y siecr set cos fort.|There was a steady influx of Christians into the Diocese of Boral (and later the First Kingdom of Borland) from the latter years of the fifth century, well into the seventh.
Cos tost, larc parmy lou stan chrestan roman ben keltesc meðes deslocað par y migration germanic, jusc ig ny regn dy Pap Mercur II a 590N au Rom un envou particuler yent cas eðeglment por y picq reyaum, deyent temporane agir costojal contr un Sothbar starchessem.|Early on, many of these were Roman or even Celtic Christians displaced by the Germanic migrations, and by the time of Pope Mercury II in 590N, Rome had taken a particular strategic influence in the small kingdom, which at the time was on the defensive against a stronger Sothbar.
Pre toð autr, y novel Reyaum er cossirað un fragossau chrestan vital yon Rom poðe missioner accaçar aust e vest por aïðanç dar ny proselytisment d'Albion e l'eiðel dannesc.|In the first instance, the new Kingdom was viewed as a vital Christian outpost from which Rome could send missionaries east and west to aid in the conversion of Albion and the Danes.
Me val noc entrar desig mell'azig hortumesc.|I shouldn't come in because of my filthy shoes.
Y tarn noscon eið ig sarf bier a groglon.|The pub we go to has beer on tap.
Nos coum tout eurað par un grand jolleistr.|We all got drunk during a big night out.
Nos reveneu all'avent de dysentry pennackit n'Europ e cos particuler n'Albion.|We return to the arrival of pennackit dysentery to Europe and in particular to Albion.
L'oc zoia pathophoric destegnt pennackit dant sta certan comtað ne Hind hamtant par ci siecr (defagl es eç accont primal connoscr different d'autr malais dysentresc, ma scein fardiment ig y mort de Rey Rahoulamathavan a Madray l'an 1735 e plusour irrouçon ne Scin tras y derran siecr avenoy desig l'oc malais),|The particular pathophoric zoia that causes pennackit had been established in parts of India for centuries (early reports are difficult to distinguish from other dysenteric ailments, but the death of King Rahulamathavan of Madray in 1735 and several outbreaks in China over the preceding century are suspected to be of the disease),
ma respanment mondial nole ençar pre 1753, ny souc dy ci Rix Democratic eð y deslocation cohernt de gent.|but global spread would not begin until 1753, in the aftermath of the Democratic Wars and the concomitant movement of peoples.
Par meyan de vascel marcander e de soldart, lonc y ci flou a Pers eð ag Rusc, y zoia fey passaç incoïbr cant l'eu vars occas.|Via merchant ships and via troops, along the rivers of Persia and the Russias, the zoia made inexorable progress on its way westward.
Vos gimmoloist a remanir ne cognit.|You worked hard to keep your covers.
Laisc ty vesson e met tey ne quil!|Take off your clothes and get in bed!
Jo n'ay tag beut par monð, ja galað.|I haven't had tea in months, come to that.
Sengr a comparaçon sta y repasc cocinað par Gevel e Mothe pre Ludric fo repaðrið—lagç a lign con saus mentagler e leum.|The meal was a relatively simple one prepared by Gevel and Tim before Ludrick got home—stringlace with mince sauce and greens.
Y pan fo un pog bruslað atorn dell'orlaç ma y ligt gostan fort aðief por engollisc farvent valir, cos particuler posc untal jorn commovent.|The bread was a little crispy on the edges but the rest was tasty enough to be worth scarfing down, especially after such an active day.
Caye tan cæros prestabr yon vole Ludric toð novel de sy figl yembr.|It was also a great opportunity for Ludrick to catch up with his children.
"J'oy tu a un religion minour soluð," dis Ludric ag veðerrem dy figl.|"I hear you’ve started a minor religion," Ludrick said to his middle child.
Gevel se dau scoul e gembondau cant sy fraðr fragns a ricottanç gesper.|Gevel pulled a face and groaned as her brother burst into breathless laughter.
"Jo nole ac cair," dis i.|"I didn’t mean to," she said.
"J'er fabr visant—"|"I was aiming for drama—"
"Gent son oy tempr costroint sur scaðr platcouf," sceu Mothe digr, ant spal soccoðent.|"People are putting shrines up on rooftops now," Tim managed to get out, his shoulders shaking.
Jo so l'oc beint por my dolour youdar.|I'm drinking this to numb the pain.
Deut es ustolment por y femn voluð.|Manners are essential for the aspiring wife.
Lour y veðerrem es tal ouveg cos nuvr.|Their eldest has been so sullen lately.
"Ac eu nos y cæros," dis Halina.|"It’s such a chance," Halina said.
"Un çaucr Promethean ag pie nostr!|"A Promethean society on our doorstep!
Tu poð noc rovar ig jo le stim cojan.|You can’t tell me not to be interested.
Incossirabr es nos neleu nossy vecin reconnoscr deut all'ig complið par sy fraðr deur veint annað."|It is absurd we shouldn’t speak to our neighbour because of what his brother did twenty years ago."
"Par sy—" Vadim tis vars parol.|"What his—" Vadim groped for words.
"Sy fraðr devastau tout.|"His brother ruined everything.
Impossibr es tu vel ig pardonnar!"|You can’t possibly forgive that!"
"Sy fraðr sta i," dis Halina cos obstinaç.|"That was his brother," Halina said obstinately.
"Nos posseu y bel amigtað beudar vars Segr Connic—"|"We could extend the hand of friendship to Sir Connick—"
"Luy stant amig a cour dy Segnour Diabolesc e ci Promethean eð orgy recevent!"|"Who is bosom friends with the Devil’s Lord and Prometheans and has orgies!"
"Ah! Jo save sceyen orgy."|"Ha! I knew it was orgies."
Vadim fo vuglað ne rackesc.|Vadim choked on his vodka.
"Jo dey le prohibir.|"Absolutely not.
I no's soiç idone por tey."|He is not a fit acquaintance for you."
Tan lovastr es ty sour por toð gent sauraun en oy.|Your sister's so gossipy everyone will know about it now.
De lou's y spien de kenopleus ja vescuð.|They kept the dream of space travel alive.
Jo sente magn voluð ne jubon de cogr.|I felt very sexy wearing a leather doublet.
Cou fort y ci hour kervandal; vale y manoir aziaus lon broit.|It was deep into the hex hours; the manor should have been silent.
I fo entrað gra de luy, y port gliðant apar e closiscent por toð y ci hou e hurislanç d'autr venatour y noit furtiviscent ablegar.|He’d let himself in, sliding through the door and closing it to keep out the hoots and rustles of other, noisier night-time predators.
No'r sceut alcun sign de við lonc y banc dy floy cant l'au y majon approismað; i n'au alcun lumner vis tras port, eð i vis alcun oy for sy lucern fosc.|There had been no sign of life on the riverbank as he’d approached; he’d seen no lights from outside, and saw none now beyond his own dark lantern.
Deye sceir alcun son deur y crasc de bosc veil s'idoneïsant par un noit freit de Novembr, eð y ronganç de Sr Gosbarrick, eð y spaið e kic avenent pront la Challow Ardan ovroy y port all'askouð e volau y diadem de Balkdere.|There should be no noise except for the creak of old wood settling in a cold November night, and Mr Gosbarrick’s snores, and the scrapes and clicks coming as soon as Challow Ardan opened the door of the saferoom and stole the Balkdere diadem.
Toð cas ig l'aziau calm gelað, ant y pousson dy cour se quinant ne ci oregl, dec l'au foudent uncos oïð.|All the same he stood frozen, his pulse thudding in his ears, because he’d bloody heard something.
Y scoutour me yettaurn scadom pouðr.|The audience pelted me with rotten tomatoes.
Jo cossir tell'yam rascettongandessem.|I find your uncle more fascinating.
J'ay me caut orbeutað d'un coronc ovart.|I've been swindled by a blatant impostor.
Nell'oc capparol voum nos un survol accommettr dy ci autranç cas barðment compostion, cas frameð musical, cas apprestanç de melody e harmoin, cas con- e desjogntur deur y model preluïscent, e cas y detaxion de costum mondial con particulertað vecin.|In this chapter we shall undertake an overview of the changes in instrumentation, in musical structure, in melodic and harmonic structure, in con- and disjuncture from the earlier styles, and in the detaxion of global traditions with vicine particularities.
Reconnosc dant all'experiç de Monçating con y barð, commettreu nos parmy scaumel ag toriot.|In light of Monçating's facility with the instrument, let us begin in the pipe family with the torriot.
Pre y siecr novoç, y ci (vangard dy) toriot e barð scaumel cosvour a ton mogn ayen cos usual un yevot sou dou doblanç eð un dureç limitað sad par y defait de lodrigneth modern vars jonc taglar.|Before the nineteenth century, the (precursors to the) torriot and similar low-pitched pipe instruments generally had a range of less than two doublings and the lack of modern reedmaking techniques severely limited their volume.
For posc l'yenç de forað pedal—adaptað des mechanism tarront par y peria nadasvarm madrayan deur plusour dezein—poðen sofflour a toriot sy tac mogn parnommað acavar (e cos final y nom 'picq tonneðr' valir) tan e sell'yevot alto clar voutent.|It was only with the advent of pedal holes—adapted from mechanisms pioneered with the Madray peria nadaswarm some decades earlier—that torriot players could reach both its famed low notes (and finally be worthy of the name "little thunder") and the startingly clear alto range.
"Inacavabr es soup a kigmau pascr con digntað, donc nel attendr," avars i, l'oc Laum forniscent de pudour dec i n'aye ja stað attenent.|"It's impossible to eat lardon soup with dignity, so please don't try," she remarked, which was embarrassing because Will hadn't been trying.
Nos parsisceum sull'yevot d'œculux.|We learnt about the electromagnetic spectrum.
Cal yevot a l'oc colluy indrec?|What is the scope of this charity?
Cal bourg parsisceu tu dessur?|Which town did you learn about?
Com bustr, l'eç bourg de Nausçod n'Istr Boral e de Lagcousc (temporane cas mandað Laicouche ne Willem Fransc), stant sevrað a for 21 stadion colombant eð y primer stant situað dessur d'un tartonc arð, poun mout fagl se cavir lou meðes a sgart.|For example, the towns of Nausçod on Borland and Lagcóch (at this time officially Laicouche in French Guillenne), being only 21 stadion apart as the crow flies and the former lying atop a steep promontory, are often within clear view of each other.
Pre y sar campaner, por un lettr accaçar des l'un vars l'autr vel cair covallar ag havan d'Ausbagn lor trasir ne ferscip, eint plausibr a Heller sur tarmagn e soulor eint veg ancour a Texel.|Before the steeplemesh, to send a letter from the one to the other would require riding to the port at Axbane and taking a ferry, likely to Heller on the mainland and then across again to Texel.
Posc y campaner aerian jognsern y stuer (y ci oseir entrpos recas for candon cayen contingent nievrous; candon caye bel ant ciel azur accommissibr sta y vistanç cos direct par un veðr illabond) vars y fin ag dezein 1830, no sceye plu besogn antal aðendr expatiant...|After the air-steeples connected the strait (the intermediate baskets only being necessary in conditions of weakened visibility; on clear days the sighting could be accomplished directly via a farseer) in the latter years of the 1830s, no such diversion was necessary...
J'ay un desc farrago nos cogt.|I've cooked us some hash.
Jo traseu y cogn un rað illabond portant.|I went round the corner carrying a fold-up bike.
Jo vos lau ag treu dy ci xiphar.|I commend you on the loyalty of the henchmen.
Vin eð autr beçon yeustað stan reconnuð com matier possent contamen coïr des y Mitað-Asc, e lembic cadarað denent cavibr generallessem ny siecr seç parmette a Arnoutszen de le rannuðar durant sy gran homily sur curaçon.|Wine and other fermented drinks had been noted as a preventative of infection since the medieval period, and the wider availability of distilled lembick in the sixteenth century allowed Arnoutszen to recommend it in his great treatise.
Y ci avanç dy Paç Lonc menau ag descovart de solution ja effectuallessem.|The advances of the Long Peace led to the discovery of yet more effective solutions.
Y molin por salpeðr (costroit por lou fornir con poið dy kynous a pouvr neir cant ðe mancaurn depost tesqual) ne Zampanagar e Tacday Ancor pres se sarvoirn de vreic marin com matier cru.|The saltpetre mills (built to provide a source of the gunpowder component in the absence of natural deposits) of Zampanagar and neighbouring Tacday Ancore made use of sea wrack as a raw ingredient.
Ne 1778, lonc y narrað dy surveilour por y ci molin a Contare, un vapour onðiçastr er remarcað montant des cuf rejeitancer y despart con vitriol seyon maneyað afont.|In 1778, according to the reports of the overseer at the Contare mills, a purplish vapour was seen rising from disposal vats in which the waste was treated with vitriol.
Ja oc eus neðan kiglau tu y vec!|It's just as well you missed the bus!
Des sovaugr mesveu jo y jainç tauger.|My pride blinded me to the bigger picture.
L'eç mersc recievn un doujug veunt frail.|These wetlands have a delicate ecosystem.
Sou y lumner dell'aubon joun, y citað de Bilvau lougeu com gem.|In the early morning light, the city of Bilvaw glittered like a jewel.
Azenar sente com un rat luïr n'un darsou magn car.|Azenar felt as though he were a rat in a very expensive maze.
Y stal zajadau dy marcað nogtorn accis par lamp fumer eð y lun fragnt de mar receven cos equal party a domn pescour pevr jarras e fenogl gostant tan e ci nobr robað n'ornament fluibond ant queldin raut frigsað ne papir cerous.|The night market's motley stalls lit by smoky lamps and the sea-shattered moon welcomed both flocks of fishwives sampling jarraspepper and fendle as well as notables in flowing finery carrying quick-fried suppers in wax papers.
Azenar se tisseu pall'aucoum, colombant scur vars y canougf a fais blau dy vancry particuler nommað par sy cosvour nell'ig tarsc pres illeibr y nuverrem.|Azenar weaved through the crowd, making a beeline for the blue-striped awning of the particular mariskery named in his cousin's latest nigh-illegible note.
Necun dy conjuraçonnour a gifar roug prefait ben ci costojan descos la se mettoirn a vijon.|Neither the expected red-shawled accomplice nor any tipped-off guards presented themselves.
Sceye vray, portan, un farrago ragostant de fler a sal eð ougl ammonent cas mendrem un repasc valibr.|There was, however, an enticing melange of salt-oil scents promising at the very least a worthwhile meal.
Jamay n'ayen ðe un bourg uvrauterrem vis.|They had never seen such an idyllic town.
Bon, j'aye hoir tu fos yert ancour.|Good, I was worried you were still awake.
Me scey foy all'anim candon y stel sgardar yert.|I feel a fire in my soul when I look up at the stars.
Cascif es tu rondant coll'eç quomodolibet?|Why do you hang out with this libertine crowd?
Cu sta y scrittour dy Codex Mysarnos n'aun gent jamay saut consecter, e l'oc livr nil declarar aïr l'argument soluð;|The author of the Mysarnos Codex has never been conclusively identified, and this book will not pretend to have done so;
certan a comparaçon es ig l'er nijommað—ben toð cas preu depostað—ny Majon Livr a Sagnt Jorsc y Martyr, un respanendessem dy ci edifiç afont dy quaðeglad cligser ja svoccað.|what is relatively certain is that it was composed—or at least first stored—at the Library of Saint George the Martyr, one of the largest buildings within the aforementioned church complex.
Vray queglant es nos poum despondr de regest a sodaltað sceint eð enter por cascun dy monastir eð autr facultað divers nell'ig zon tras y siecr seç enter ben pres, ig inclus moustr lonc lour við por bempart parmy lou.|What is frustrating is that we have access to extant and complete membership records for the various monasteries and other institutions in the area for almost the entire sixteenth century, and biographical information for many among them.
Nentamen, nos veim alcun soumoin des un soul chronic ja existant ag forganç dy Codex Mysarnos.|Nonetheless, no mention is made by any of the surviving chronicles of the production of the Mysarnos Codex.
Nos raðaum tras quaðeglad lonc camin attriboit.|We biked across campus along designated lanes.
Vel my tarsc d'acat me soumonir posc nostrell'yenç.|Please remind me of my shopping list when we arrive.
Ðe ern y hey pegntant a roug.|They were painting the fence red.
J'ay hey pos all'obægerrem.|I've cordoned off the sicker people.
Veraçter, may a doç scourmer ny Phœbos sou mac Kellot saven arabesc parolar un pog toð cas; l'eiðel commarcer brittesc e morracan ern surponent ne Gal e Spagn pres dou siecr all'oc hour.|In fact, more than a dozen crewmembers of mac Kellot's Phœbos had at least some Arabic; the British and Morrack mercantile domains had overlapped in Gaul and Spain for nearly two centuries at this point.
Dou parmy ben may le scavoirn plen suet, neðan parolaurn—y caðarn a mission circoler par al-Hamid remane ja intradoit vars latin, e l'aïða nauganç cos imparsoubr.|At least two were entirely fluent writers, if not speakers—al-Hamid's book of circular functions was as yet untranslated in Latin and was an invaluable navigational aid.
Lor pres inacavabr es y magntud a humour sur y Cynthia sou al-Casmi figurar cant, posc sojornar ag vest lontanessem plausibr a alcun hom par toð y histoir d'humantað, i parvenoy cos final Moharram 924 un loy pres connuð.|So it is almost impossible to imagine the height of emotion on al-Casmi's Cynthia as, having travelled further west than anyone in quite possibly the history of humanity, it arrived at last in Muharram 924 somewhere almost familiar.
Y ci racont seyon oïð dy cartograph des l'Occas Jagerrem sevent, y scourm najaurn lonc y rimmot vars y citað treborth de Sinquan.|Following the stories they heard of the map-makers from the Far West, the crew travelled along the coast to the port city of Sinquan.
J'ay neyað a y bon solution augrimar.|I've failed to calculate the right answer.
Nos annexaum y parform con funambr follour.|We enhanced the performance with tightrope walkers.
Jo's roglfiant cas teudesc lepçan parolar.|My spoken Lepsick Dutch is getting rusty.
Lonc y façon la ageurn y Roman allors tras l'empir, y ci traitment sagntað e ci divintað ja existant all'Istr Boral tradugsern ðe ny caglou e reforgaurn ðe ny jout dy pantheon romannesc.|Much as the Romans did across the rest of the empire, the pre-existing sacred practices and divinities on Borland were interpreted through the lens of and recast in the mould of the Roman pantheon.
L'oc poðe font aïr des comport magn naðusc doujugher—com bustr, y veðerrem veneraçon por Nahalennia lonc y rimmot souðer eð auster all'istr, luy stant un deves de commarç e dell'ocean, denoy incorporað de raçon inconnuð con y cult por Pluton e luy deves runið vars sy femn Proserpina.|This could be based on really quite tenuous analogies—for example, the old worship of Nahalennia along the southern and western coasts of the island, who was a goddess of trade and the ocean, was absorbed for unclear reasons into the cult of Pluto and she was syncretised with his wife Proserpina.
Ci autr deitað stan vecinaðessem ben jogndessem indesbroiðabr sur particulertað geographic, e cossy sceint stan compliscabr lon dolour com part all'œcumen religious de Rom.|Other deities were more localised or connected inextricably to particular geographical features, and as such could be incorporated painlessly into the Roman religious landscape.
Just exact com Tamesis ne Britannia e Sequana ne Gal, y floy noscon oy nommað Reim er alcant parsonfiað com y deu Reagimos.|Just as there was Tamesis in Britannia and Sequana in Gaul, the river now called Reim was once personified as the god Reagimos.
Casc gent veurn y sagntroðes all'auter.|Everyone saw the priestess at the altar.
Nos erau y Nil gaddant aval n'auror.|We were motoring down the Nile at sunrise.
Y molin produg alcun zucar des insorgent le quariçtovaurn.|The mill hasn't produced any sugar since rebels sabotaged it.
Baron Monçating y sest fo nað par Segr Josua e Domn Evangelin durant yarn l'an 1770 sur lour dominion ne Launembrig.|The sixth Baron Monçating was born to Lord Josua and Lady Evangelin in the winter of 1770 at their estate in Launembrig.
Segr Josua, cos incoïbr, sta luy meðes un parsonaç querellabr ny melle damvaðesc deut a raçon plusour:|Lord Josua, inevitably, was himself a controversial figure in Damvath society for several reasons:
stant un ivan des y staddomain cappatian,|having been born in the Cappatian staddomain,
stant marið con un nobr ant caðen ancestral waranesc (recent magn demay por pudour vetomondin suffigr),|having married a noblewoman of Warnine descent (far too recently for Vetomundine sensibilities),
e final stant y barony de Haubrath tramis par sy cosvour scon stemn posc finisceu un calver legal un dezein vant (parmy provost y longessem disputað a histoir borallesc).|and finally having inherited the Barony of Haubrath from his second cousin following a decade-long legal battle (one of the longest legal disputes in Borland history).
Luy decident apres y grad sindr broyar e cossy for Monçating retenir sta y coup occeint poll'idea dy mendrem aïr a convenibiltað.|His decision thereupon to dissolve the senior title and retain only Monçating was the final nail in the coffin for any hope of respectability.
Jo save noc tu aus cosvour scon stemn n'Ambrosia!|I didn't know you had second cousins in Ambrosia!
Querellabr es oðr l'ig imascry fos vray meðes volað.|It's debatable whether that sculpture was even really stolen.
Y scavour cossy sceint poð noc hand dar all'hom poið.|As a journalist, they cannot have sex with their source.
Par surcresc, l'accaç campaner baric sta nuverrem aðief a noc ancour l'ançan doujug a gonfan e lamp destarrir, magn afferjarant tras Spagn, Gal eð Italy.|Moreover, the barrick steeplepost was still so young that it had not displaced the earlier flag-lamp system, widespread across Spain, Gaul and Italy.
Deur certan exclusion (cos celeberrem y fil Cracou a Bitom ne Pologn souðer), debriscellisað er y tar prest ag respanment d'accaç filað tras Europ aust e norðer, e vray des l'eç polity receveu nos y majortað dy tarrouçon cas astrapophor nell'Asc Asteller aval.|With some exceptions (notably the Cracow-Bitom line in southern Poland), the ground was clear for the spread of wired post across northern and eastern Europe, and indeed it is from these places that we get most of the barrick innovations of the late Workshop period.
Lor y ci tachygraph filað primal stan fatuous por laurar e tan car por accarr—doutr allors sceye pog advantaç savibr a edifiç marcant, possent cos fagl hur dar an coutoccour ja suet cas y model d'Adamich.|So the early wired tachygraphs were cumbersome to use and expensive to get hold of—and furthermore there was little incentive for businesses, who could simply hire a tapper already fluent in the Adamich system.
Jo's debriscellisant por scoy d'un seman a scitation.|I'm laying the groundwork for a piece-of-cake exam week.
Taçað neðan y madarc avartr!|Shut up or you'll alert the cops!
I coutoccau y tambour agil eð exact.|Her drumming was deft and precise.
Cayen ciel de neir fosc encoster, aguilað par murðon stel lougent.|The sky was a deep, inky black, studded with a myriad glittering stars.
Y lun oppos bagna l'œcumen sou un lumner argentastr, ombr jaint lonc tras y ci tombr dallottað.|The full moon bathed the landscape in a silvery light, casting long shadows across the rolling hills.
L'arbr hurislan sou un bris fresc, un frigçon dant ag font dy tors a Samir.|A cool breeze ruffled the trees, sending a shiver down Samir's spine.
I se fassau y mantel atorn sarraðessem e porseveu a un camin trovar tras y makisaç.|He wrapped his cloak tighter around himself and continued to pick his way through the undergrowth.
Soutan oyeu Samir coroc d'un bachet ados.|Suddenly, Samir heard a twig snap behind him.
I volteu raut e lor attenoy par un pog d'hour, ci oregl sforçant, ma tout taçoirn.|He spun round and waited for a few moments, straining his ears, but all was silent.
L'ençau tornant a sy camin reprendr, ma uncos le quinau starc par ados, le dessoclant vars tar yembr.|He turned to continue on his way, but something crashed into him from behind, knocking him to the ground.
Nos erreu l'oc kessandar coram fin a bogr defassar.|We have to discuss this in person before we can make any progress.
Toð my famigl promoun kireðam y regnanç anthracit.|My family all fully support the anthracite government.
Ðe aun niaç a fuyo pall'eç dou annað.|They've been living in sin for two years.
"Ac vespr, bossir," saluðau y livrer, y test ponent nacleu d'un façon stant cortal e conjuraçonnant y dou—a veg meðes solemn demay por un vocationner ma parcevent cos manifest demay por un actour doit.|"Good evening, sir," the bookseller said, inclining his head in a way that was both courtly and conspiratorial—at once too formal for a tradesman and too obviously self-aware for a trained actor.
"Jo crey noc nos ayau acconnosc.|"I don't believe we've met before.
Jo dign Brandon Cavendish."|I'm Brandon Cavendish."
"Frederick Walton, thein vostr," respos Frederick, y man offriscent.|"Frederick Walton, at your service," Frederick replied, extending his hand.
Y pogn de Cavendish sta sec e freit, luy man soccoðent cos starc lon skassar.|Cavendish's grip was dry and cool, his handshake firm without being crushing.
"Soð vos ac por gilaçar, Sr Walton, ben n'un tom particuler tenent all'idea?"|"Are you here to browse, Mr Walton, or did you have a particular volume in mind?"
"Nien de tal apprestment," dis Frederick.|"Nothing so planned," Frederick said.
"Jo so nuvr alandað des Goring e donc un novel misol a leir recarnt auvorn."|"I am recently arrived from Goring and in dire need of some new reading material."
"Lor soð vos venuð ag bon varous," dis y livrer par un sourey plait.|"Then you've come to the right place," the bookseller said with a smile.
"Vel jo te mostrar ig noscon vençað."|"Let me show you what we have."
Dagormay erra i sy parol robar volonter.|From now on she'll have to choose her words wisely.
Jamiscað plu, casc hom!|Stop complaining, everyone!
Jo hoir nolir jamay lour neðolmar.|I'm afraid I'll never fit in with them.
Samuel e Clovia son megl s'aðelent casc veg lonc ig ðe reun a repaðr de schol, malgrað y noçon de lourell'instroyour sur y sfondranç dell'Empir Mitað-Asc sein vreçous.|Samuel and Clovia do better for themselves every time they return from school, although their history tutor's opinions on the collapse of the Medieval Imperia are execrable.
Jo prefay ðe seraun y dou entrað ny melle pre poðir l'oc tom a diabr editar, a sgart calscon; Hilgart es deja y vessonary depegntað examinant ne spien ig nos veleu se mostrar ne barstant pre Març (jo pieð neðan tu svoc capel jos luy!).|I expect they shall both be in the melee before this blasted book is published, in any case; Hilgart is already reading the illustrated costumery in the hopes that we might all be fashionable by March (kindly do not mention hats in her company!).
Dou opinion soul dey jo rescaur, y volum partenent.|Only two points must I reiterate regarding the volume.
Primer, jo poð bogr cos total Y Mur eð Y Clojon rendr picquessem—vital es y ci mod d'ouvranç de Hadrian ne Brittan e n'Istr Boral por nos comprenau lour y doum inequal durant l'asc posc-classic, dec con sy regn vien l'inception d'autonomy dicerrem all'eiðel nostr.|First, I absolutely cannot condense The Wall and The Hedgerow—contrasting Hadrian's policies in Britain and in Borland is vital for understanding their different fates in the post-Classical age, for his reign marks the beginning of our island's greater autonomy.
J'ay spien y heloit vos treubr noc.|I hope the noise doesn't trouble you.
A tu uncos sou y blau trovað nell'ig vessonary?|Have you found anything cool in that catalogue?
Ty fraðr es untal daugnam incaint sceir sy lucr volar.|Your brother's the kind of dupe who'll get his money stolen.
Interim, ny ci region la gent lou adoptan tostessem, y tachygraph surcourn carið cos stoniscent.|However, in those places where there was early adoption, the tachygraph proved astonishingly popular.
Y ci region prepondran citað fort appopulað e domain urban aðoinç rapid souvant.|These were usually dense cities and urban areas undergoing rapid growth.
Ne Safford, com bustr, ja fornið con doujug fondaminal e starc d'accaçment, y joun Bourgmer Crawford surveilau l'instauration dy preu banc redirigent a ambit accacer.|In Safford, for example, which already had a robust postal infrastructure, the young Mayor Crawford oversaw the installation of the first redirection banks in post offices.
Y ci banc tarromoy y model cossy descreibr: un mission dað sera prefis con un scifr muncever (triant parmig, a Makerfell sta i MKF) parmettent ag zygomour d'y mission accaçar apar vars y bon ambit veciner, seut par un scifr majonner (normalisað aval com catr keren e soulor un lettr) eð ant l'eç scifr sceus y mission star tramis vars y bon machin.|These pioneered the system in which a given missive would be prepended with a borough code (for example, Makerfell's was MKF) allowing the switchers to send the message through to the correct local post office, followed by a house code (eventually standardised to four digits followed by a letter) whence the message could be transmit to the correct machine.
Jo me landau y visaç raut nell'evier.|I quickly washed my face in the sink.
Ðe n'aun recas ig tu lou costosc.|They don't need you to protect them.
Here are the extracted Borlish sentences and their English translations, formatted as requested:
Posc un demy hour, vastel scoclettað magn demay eð un acquetta de limon scencað auvorn, Zoe descenoy y novel leyour peripaton quaucant e gasau y gið embrostað.|Half an hour, far too much shockled cake and a generous glass of limmon acquetta later, Zoe strode out of the new unmanned lifter and peered at the ornate signposts.
Y cla ne man aye inscaunç sarvent d'un auçel fylau eð un catr keren ne lettranç net, e donc aulau i lonc y colloir combinant fin a sy port yembr, stant impos ny mur cos soutil.|The key in her hand was helpfully inscribed with a fullaw bird and the number four in neat script, so she turned down the corresponding corridor until she found her door, set discreetly into the wall.
Entarn, y bevey a cambr (vertaðer, noc magn may a picq salon e quelt n'un eðegl) sta apprestað lonc y barstant novessem de Morac, toð pieðry revelað con tapeçment e vriðel penent.|Inside, the set of rooms (really, not much more than a small parlour and a bed in an alcove) was decorated in the latest Morrack fashions, all exposed stonework draped in tapestries and curtains.
L'augher ag cogn aye meðes ans ne form de naðr.|The ewer in the corner even had a handle in the shape of a viper.
Y cambr hur noscon dað avars stan bolegs e capaç.|The rooms that we rented were tidy and spacious.
Cal voun ðe por lourell'erraç idoneïsar?|What will they do to fix their mistakes?
Eð hour alcot es caint y storcment?|And for how long has the blackmail been going on?
"Façau follanç all'area fruy pre un douçur cascun triar ou?" dis Benjamin.|"Let's take a spin on the dance floor before dessert, shall we?" Benjamin said.
Luy e Martha aurn toð y desc delið, e futil enter sta y residu dy collocq attendr a prolongar—lonc y bustr ig, y concið de Lucas parisce cos implausibr s'accommettr megl a sell'un.|He and Martha had cleared their plates, and there was no point prolonging what remained of the conversation—in that respect Lucas' date seemed impossibly to be going better than his.
Yvet sta toð cas sona luyent de cur dar ag monolog de Lucas.|Yvette was at least pretending to pay attention to Lucas' monologue.
Martha accordau, stant clar yent an conclujon cosvour.|Martha agreed, having clearly come to a similar conclusion.
Le souprenent, y domn surcou fort fruyour, ant pas leger e gournanç d'hour scur.|To his surprise, she proved a good dancer, with light steps and a good sense of timing.
Tandic ençau y cançon sevent, i vis ig Yvet oncau Lucas all'area fruy.|As the next song started, he saw Yvette dragging Lucas onto the dance floor.
Benjamin parceveu n'approvant ig i luy tenoy man distr con pogn fatuous e skassant—y compromis seyon fair accougl dec Lucas refusau y pie d'Yvet piestar.|Benjamin noted with approval that he held her right hand in an awkward, crushing grip—the compromise they'd reached over Lucas' unwillingness to tread on her feet.
Surcas au y fait ig degnant i volois pront eð allagr se fornir d'aer issugt, i spornau skiseç mancar.|Apparently, while he had no objection to being dull, he drew the line at clumsy.
Benjamin apponoy ja oc eus.|Benjamin supposed it was just as well.
Defait de skiseç volois noc un aer de vertað por toð gent ayent le vis ne combat.|Feigned clumsiness wouldn't have been believable to anyone who had seen him fight.
Un complet boncop eð un camis fossettað noc obstroint, Lucas farau fort ne fruyant—ligs e graçous.|Despite the cheap suit and the wrinkled shirt, Lucas fit in on the dance floor—sleek and graceful.
Parcanç aðief ig Yvet cossiraus valir sy collocq souvar par toð y tædium.|Maybe enough so that Yvette would consider it worth suffering through his conversation.
Y sartour er un fleus neir embrostant.|The dressmaker was embroidering a black velvet.
My fraðr dessoclau y castel blader meyon costroit.|My brother knocked over the house of cards I built.
Façað plu stancour a my nuçal!|Stop meddling in my wedding!
Ma y majortað (catr part ne cinq, accordant lonc y narrað annual recentessem des l'Edifiç meðes) a zucar consunt n'Istr Boral es recoglt cos vecintaðer.|But the majority (four parts in five, in accordance with the latest annual reports from the Institute itself) of sugar consumed on Borland is produced in the vicinity.
Toll'eç preu bustr tesmogn de gent scarob betraver nastiscent son ag siecr seç; a veir particuler y scaunç in experientia de theorist willemesc Tewis Camigner, y natur douç e colour 'bilrod' seyon svoccað afont.|The first attestations of betraver syrup being produced are all in the sixteenth century; see for example the in experientia writings of Willem theorist Tewis Camigner, wherein the sweetness and 'billrod hue' of beet syrup are noted.
Scey pog evidenç de recoglenç commarcer d'ig noscon nommabr 'betraver tesqual' ne Willem durant y Rix Romannesc e l'interrouçon cohernt ny sar marcer.|There is little evidence of commercial production of what we might call 'natural betraver' in Willem during the Romantic Wars and the concomitant disruption to the trade mesh.
Qualtað piour a doit ayent cloistau alcun ort a peðenç real vars l'oc matier.|Its inferiority as compared to cane hindered the growth of any real demand for the substance.
Par surcresc, stemn usual a betraf cavibr prell'accensment de Pentros ne dezein 1730 contene parcanç zucar lonc for un part n'ogtant, fort picquessem a doit.|Moreover, usual varieties of beet before the Pentrose survey of the 1730s would contain perhaps one part in eighty sugar, far lower than cane.
Y gent n'Ausçagm smoutaurn desig l'occijon.|The Ausçagm public rioted because of the murder.
Sell'amig er l'œcumen sovemblant cant nos pascau.|His friend was sketching the surroundings as we ate.
Alcun hom au y lamp fornið con zygom.|No-one had installed a switch for the light.
Y mençon ig remaneus un Empir Theudesc fo sevelið ne grauf jos y cadavr dy preu Reyaum Saxon, l'eiðel y dynasty Hogbrocken appartenent stant diminoit vars lourell'eðegl fondominal amont ne Lepzi e Magdebourg.|The fiction of a surviving German Empire was laid to rest with the corpse of the first Kingdom of Saxony, with the domain of the Hoghbrocken dynasty reduced to their core lands upstream in Lepzi and Magdeburg.
Y nou-redoit Marcgrau Baldr de Saxony, temporane no stant for catr annað eld, cou cos comprensibr par megl manouvr dy Stadbund smargent.|The newly-reduced Margrave Baldur of Saxony, being only 4 years old at the time, was understandably outmanœuvred by the nascent Stadbund.
Ma y ci polity-colluy nommað com y Stadbund, y Samslutning ben y Collijon Norðer cascun (nos veim usual ne scaunç latin collisio theodisc) creurn noc, lon digr, ex nihilo all'aubon dy siecr catorç.|But the guild-states known variously as the Stadbund, the Samslutning or the North Collision (we see in Latin documents usually collisio theodisc) did not, of course, appear fully-formed at the dawn of the fourteenth century.
Nos poum y racin de concort entr citað deut, peðaç eð autr parsoument coyençant furtivir jusc y siecr doç tost.|We can trace the roots of intercivic contracts restricting tariffs, tolls and other fees back to the early twelfth century.
Jo sta spait demay a porsief luy fair.|I was too scared to run after her.
Gent ern autoschedon faint a dou lonc y torg clojonnað.|People were sparring in pairs around the private square.
Pre finisceu y belem, trey hom ancour forn mort.|By the end of the scene three more people were dead.
Toð ratiocination convoluð com y ci noscon cossirað jusc oy nell'oc capparol arra pres certan doum damnað, for meðes dec—lonc vegl refrain leonesc—un veskit es inkintabr sur un doçan d'aguil.|Any scheme which is as convoluted as the ones we have seen so far in this chapter is almost certainly doomed, if only because—as they say in Leon—one cannot knit a veskit on a dozen needles.
Conjuraçon criminal partenent, nos porreu a plaç l'astuç dy stel original ne masquira Matthias o Grallon sevir: "Vayað noc vars y Lun por un Jorala accarr".|In the case of criminal plots, we might instead heed the advice of the original icon of masquira Matthias o Grallon: "Do not go to the moon to acquire a Jorala".
Casc pas e conjuraçonnour ancour poun un pognt a sfondranç surcair, e nos parceveu nullig alcun illustration parfaitessem dell'oc axiom a ny decadenç dy staddomain awasoucondesc.|Every new step, every added conspirator is a potential collapse point, and nowhere is this principle more perfectly illustrated than the tale of the downfall of the Awasúconda staddomain.
Situað amont (deg meco atorn derim tras y Fastig Camboscung deur y veðerrem treborth nommað Parnaven) sur y banc dy floy Awasou, l'oc region sta un sodal par comparaçon tart a y band d'instançment enajant jogndr lonc y colon de Cappatia auster.|Situated upstream (several miles inland across the Camboshung Ridge from the older seaport town of Parnaven) on the banks of the Awasú, this region was a relatively late member of the band of export-based settlements along the spine of eastern Cappatia.
Saveð vos cal praxitel gravau y Macchine di Helio?|Do you know which sculptor carved the Machines of Helios?
Y gant distr a my gamma ayen un deðal pagnt ig.|My grandma's right glove had a thimble built-in.
J'er pol frigsant je ados cas mey.|I was frying chicken at home yesterday.
Noc obstroint l'er fait pog martial de character, Andreu ant sy ment indeslocabr a jainç e sepostion nonscalent vars tact naðeu vole dar ig jo fos incaint a carceration souvar entr y mur dy Castel Safford lon tarm, ben fin a i sceus me benoçar megl.|Though he was not particularly martial-minded, Andrew's uncompromising tactical nous and cavalier disregard for simple diplomacy meant I would likely languish as a prisoner at Safford Castle indefinitely, or until he could put me to some better use.
Val pog; y cambr sta calt cos bel degnant y morostað de janver tras port, ant un foy kirtant eudæmon sou tapeçment lonc un victoir markesc ancour descreint—j'appone—tandy y pardastr afont no sta bogr discernibr.|No matter; the room was warm despite the January gloom outside, a merrily-crackling fire under a long tapestry depicting—I assumed—another Markish victory, though it was anyone's guess against whom.
Ag mur atras, jo saveu des y clartað dy ci quarrel ig ðe forn cos recent affis all'oc ans veil, accas plausibr ne carganç des y hal dy praxitel bavarn.|On the other wall, the clarity of the panes suggested they were a recent addition to this old wing, possibly commissioned from the Bavarn masters.
Allors aye jo plusour fenestr parceut y veðr zajadau dy siecr derran tenent tojorn, un vert obægr surcaint just inequivalibr par y lumner a tijon.|Elsewhere I had noticed many windows still held the jackdaw glass of the previous century, in a sickly green that could not quite be offset with torchlight.
Nossy majon er costroit sur rout nacleu.|Our house was built on a sloping street.
L'eç bojay ne voncir acataust vos ou?|Was it you who bought these beeswax candles?
Y fraðr dou eurn cosogr com zachet.|The two brothers stuck together like glue.
POR SONDAÇ: Zaquesc Select poll'Avegl Felaver, par Axel fi Magno|IN REVIEW: Selected Refreshments for the Social Bee, by Axel fi Magno
Y capel commet dant ag volum derran de fi Magno des sy rig a livr cocinancer Select nos affirm ig no scey necun festeul, crevoscr eurað ben raðunanç sengr eð amiabr stant inaðelibr par un ouçon sagaç des l'oc gið.|The introduction to fi Magno's newest entry in his renowned Selected series of recipe books assures us that no soirée, no carrow's-eve and no simple friendly get-together cannot be improved with a judicious choice from this volume.
Eð indeniabr es ig l'oc tom a un tagl y stent de sy vangard doblant cos fagl, may a 300 method contenent ant tout entr tatou yarcer e scadom vorpal sur bachet.|And indeed, this tome is easily twice the size of any of its predecessors, containing over 300 recipes with everything from haskent tover to stack-die shadomes.
Vray fos jo my deut fugnt ða jo n'aus certan dell'eç method attis a cogr com mey; y kyriel a kynous appos par fi Magno ig vos arreð sou man no's irraçonabr demay, ma meðes ci parmy vous sceindessem derim posn desirar y vanc mar kiglar.|I would have been remiss not to try making a few of these recipes for myself; the range of ingredients that fi Magno supposes you have available is not too unreasonable, although those further inland may wish to avoid the seafood.
Nos flannaum pall'yarç colloir ant yeðrot parlocant.|We ambled down the pergola with ivy all around us.
Cu a l'oc ugnlac vorpal laiscað jos ty panner?|Who's left this diced onion next to the breadbin?
Vossy neuç cant d'un kyriel infalagover.|Your niece has an impressive singing range.
Appos tant—Amigòt degnau noc nos sarvir par un chronic mantenent—es ig sy regn durau ogtoç annað por sceus Menton garantir sy hereter triað vole soutien pres unanim recevir dy Concert, l'edifiç de legifiçour provençal ant form emprontað dell'oc veneçan.|It is also supposed—Amigòt did not do us the service of keeping a chronicle—that his rule lasted eighteen years to allow Menton to ensure his chosen successor enjoyed near-unanimous support of the Concert, the Provincial legislative house modelled after the Venetians'.
Sell'ouçon faïð Raimond Aurellex, ayent sy sour y jundressem mariðað e dont y fraðr Lohis fo mort cant i fey caf poll'assaut ag Battagl de Satillew, perisceu d'un mescanç caucer ne 1511 (eð y recordation commun noc obstroint, l'oc cainç particuler sta cos implausibr occijon).|His first choice Raimond Aurellex, who had married his youngest sister and whose brother Lohis had died leading the charge at the Battle of Satillew, died in a hunting accident in 1511 (and despite the popular understanding, this particular incident was likely not an assassination).
Toð case final, y Concert eligeu y cosvour de Menton, Antoin Amigòt, por y Concert gournar sou y cur glacent e giðanç martial de daus Sanz, Daniel Menton sell'influyenç issarnt lon dout apar magn posc i soloy ombisc cos nominal.|In the end, the Concert elected Menton's cousin Antoin Amigòt to lead the Concert under the close attention and martial guidance of daus Sanz, through whom Daniel Menton doubtless exercised his influence long after his nominal stepping down.
Jo no sta jamay sviðour de fic.|I've never been a fan of figs.
Nos creim vos desfayað y morrig goðamer acconnoscr.|We believe you'd prefer not to meet our bigoted aunt.
Vail l'ig quagl star y quagl pascent?|Should that quail be eating the curds?
Ða l'aus un curtel frivol cossirabr posseïð lor plausibr sta i volois le triað por aziar fier accougl, ma i no l'aye.|If she’d owned a gown that could be called frivolous she might have selected it to demonstrate solidarity, but she did not.
I mis sy collar y reloðessem, un rascou ne perl gran luy dað com bricot de Hulda, e pastisceu cos leger l'idea d'y magð assignar a sy cavel compondr n'un form minutiosessem, ma toverstau.|She donned her best necklace, a grain-pearl rascow that had been a gift from Hulda, and toyed with the idea of asking the maid to arrange her hair into something more elaborate, but lost her nerve.
No sceye un sorty for insolemn.|It was only an informal sorty.
Conrad vole creir ig i sta fol denuð.|Conrad would think she’d run mad.
Par sell'obstinacy tardisceu i jusc surcair y derran a entrar ny salon.|Her reluctance delayed her to the point that she was the last into the parlour.
Ja scey casc autr hom, casc gent taçoirn, e l'atmospher cant l'aulau afont portau toll'exuberanç fujonner d'un torvegl.|Everyone else was there, everyone was silent, and the atmosphere as she walked in had all the joie de vivre of a thunderstorm.
Nos vail tout un picq pog de fabr a nossy jorn.|We could all do with a bit less excitement in our lives.
Nos n'arreu magn vivirc neðan y scon vec kiglar.|We won't have much leeway to catch the second bus.
L'oc majon dien vabian closnauterrem casc annað.|This house gets more run-down every year.
"Or." Hemma parolau de vois kieð demay.|"Well." Hemma's voice was too calm.
"Vray dis jo incoïbr es traiçon.|"I did say it always ends in betrayal.
Por mell'envou, repars tu for oy calscon bravur exiguous teyon accomblabr zelous, ben es tu un pascaret trayour lonc y mesur?"|Out of interest, did you only now lose whatever excuse for a spine you possess, or have you been a treacherous little rat all along?"
I poðe noc y frigçon a Monick mesveir.|She couldn't miss Monick's flinch.
"Ja's indeniabr; sou ty man so jo clavir.|"Of course you have; you played me like a fiddle.
Ne vertað, jo vil toð adolanç te dar por y sona de credola lon art hamtar tan bel."|Truly, I must applaud your dedication to the role of hapless ingénue."
Marça se pleyau eç ogl.|Marça’s eyes narrowed.
"Vel le deniar, Monick."|"Surely you didn’t, Monick."
"Pu i poð noc, certan," dis Hemma cos brutal.|"Of course she did," Hemma said viciously.
"Bon Deu, Monick, val tu parform ne fabr.|"Really, Monick, you ought to be on the stage.
Ben ig tu laur plu ag tragçment e te dedey vars lucr fair con tell'experiç real.|Or give up the illustrations and dedicate yourself to selling what you’re actually good at.
Y majon de Camin d'Arquèr veln te benoçar lon vacillar, untal agreç a tu vars star benoçað."|They could use you on Camin d'Arquèr, for how good you are at being used."
Sbolognment sera toll'eç kynous cavir pront candon recas.|It must be a pain needing to have all these ingredients to hand.
Nos voum noc sy volary outrscac venjar ou?|Are we just going to ignore his brazen thievery?
Gam sgarant me cof donc j'enfugheu.|Wanderlust called me and so I ran away.
L'ouvr de Desselut vole remanir irreconnuð tras dou dezein apen (deut majortaðer ag scompigl dy Rix Democratic), e nell'eç annað i vole deïr y combat fugr vars Cantuer norman cos primer e soulor vars Provenç par Portingal.|Desselut's work would go unrecognised for nearly two decades (due predominantly to the disruption of the Democratic Wars), during which time she would be forced to flee first to Norman Kent and later to Provence, via Portingale.
Cant l'er ac sojornant ençau i a correspondr con y mathematorg Raymond al Moustafa, oc stant temporane hamtant ne Barcelon sou y patronisment dy Duc d'Aragon.|It was in these years that she began corresponding with mathematician Raymond al Mustafa, who was at the time resident in Barcelon under the Duke of Aragon's patronage.
Lour y lettr nos offriscn un parcevet queglant a methodic primal, ma meðes y dou s'envoloirn may ag ci cohernç issent por við.|Their letters offer a tantalising glimpse into early methodics, although both were more interested in the implications for life.
Desselut ratiocinau ig exist un lengaç vital (parmy sy scaunç a luy i le nommau y Parol Divin) present ny ci casel dy corp.|Desselut inferred the existence of a vital language (in her own writing she called it the Divine Word) present in the cases of the body.
Alcun hom sceu y scompigl redugr ny vesteul.|Nobody managed to calm the chaos in the foyer.
Jo vel hur dar an udomintel.|I would like to hire a babysitter.
Nos broucaum un crevoscr vunnastr accougl.|We spent a merry evening together.
…Pomona volois jamay poðir expatiar con tal experiç ag them dy congerie continu de combat mendevan zajadau, ci oïð certan aðief ent par Emilla des sy fraðr y jundressem deur for hour l'oc aubon.|…Pomona would never have been able to speak so knowledgeably on the subject of the ongoing congeries of Mendevan wars, about which Emilla had heard quite enough from her youngest brother that very morning.
Y lampionnour fo venuð e partið tras y jogntur vars Zanca de Molinero prell'hour yon y covalcat a connoscenç de Pomona ençau a vrimnar apart e lor collocq picquesseum sceurn ortellir ig ne cognit.|The lamplighter had been and gone round the juncture onto Zanca de Molinero by the time Pomona's cavalcade of cognoscences began to wind down and smaller conversations managed to sidle in unnoticed.
Emilla sorgoy des sy hamarr denent incommodessem pres y fenestr, recomponoy y ci kynous y fatuosessem ne sy spallot alað (cos recent rafayattað ne form voinaçaller sou y man de car Valeria, un denzan repaðrið d'un parrinment ne Napr l'eç barstant 'disimpecciabile' may cascun carnt), e captau y remarc de sy glovir Zoe…|Emilla arose from her increasingly-uncomfortable seat by the window, rearranged the fiddliest parts of her winged shoulder pieces (recently retailored in the armourcloth style by her darling Valeria, a repatriate from an expedition to Naples in search of ever-more 'disimpecciabile' fashions), and caught the eye of her sister-in-law Zoe…
J'ignor trevogt demay poll'oc scarrad yarçer.|I don't know enough voidtales for this crossword.
Tre moðnaut ern y cordamn laðrant.|Three sailors were climbing in the rigging.
Dou aragn son y platcouf flaðrant.|Two spiders are climbing on the ceiling.
Sceyen a coul fix chrestan venent ag Dioces Boral (eð aval y Preu Reyaum d'Istr Boral) dy ci annað tardessem ny siecr cinq e vars y siecr set cos fort.|There was a steady influx of Christians into the Diocese of Boral (and later the First Kingdom of Borland) from the latter years of the fifth century, well into the seventh.
Cos tost, larc parmy lou stan chrestan roman ben keltesc meðes deslocað par y migration germanic, jusc ig ny regn dy Pap Mercur II a 590N au Rom un envou particuler yent cas eðeglment por y picq reyaum, deyent temporane agir costojal contr un Sothbar starchessem.|Early on, many of these were Roman or even Celtic Christians displaced by the Germanic migrations, and by the time of Pope Mercury II in 590N, Rome had taken a particular strategic influence in the small kingdom, which at the time was on the defensive against a stronger Sothbar.
Pre toð autr, y novel Reyaum er cossirað un fragossau chrestan vital yon Rom poðe missioner accaçar aust e vest por aïðanç dar ny proselytisment d'Albion e l'eiðel dannesc.|In the first instance, the new Kingdom was viewed as a vital Christian outpost from which Rome could send missionaries east and west to aid in the conversion of Albion and the Danes.
Me val noc entrar desig mell'azig hortumesc.|I shouldn't come in because of my filthy shoes.
Y tarn noscon eið ig sarf bier a groglon.|The pub we go to has beer on tap.
Nos coum tout eurað par un grand jolleistr.|We all got drunk during a big night out.
Nos reveneu all'avent de dysentry pennackit n'Europ e cos particuler n'Albion.|We return to the arrival of pennackit dysentery to Europe and in particular to Albion.
L'oc zoia pathophoric destegnt pennackit dant sta certan comtað ne Hind hamtant par ci siecr (defagl es eç accont primal connoscr different d'autr malais dysentresc, ma scein fardiment ig y mort de Rey Rahoulamathavan a Madray l'an 1735 e plusour irrouçon ne Scin tras y derran siecr avenoy desig l'oc malais),|The particular pathophoric zoia that causes pennackit had been established in parts of India for centuries (early reports are difficult to distinguish from other dysenteric ailments, but the death of King Rahulamathavan of Madray in 1735 and several outbreaks in China over the preceding century are suspected to be of the disease),
ma respanment mondial nole ençar pre 1753, ny souc dy ci Rix Democratic eð y deslocation cohernt de gent.|but global spread would not begin until 1753, in the aftermath of the Democratic Wars and the concomitant movement of peoples.
Par meyan de vascel marcander e de soldart, lonc y ci flou a Pers eð ag Rusc, y zoia fey passaç incoïbr cant l'eu vars occas.|Via merchant ships and via troops, along the rivers of Persia and the Russias, the zoia made inexorable progress on its way westward.
Vos gimmoloist a remanir ne cognit.|You worked hard to keep your covers.
Laisc ty vesson e met tey ne quil!|Take off your clothes and get in bed!
Jo n'ay tag beut par monð, ja galað.|I haven't had tea in months, come to that.
Sengr a comparaçon sta y repasc cocinað par Gevel e Mothe pre Ludric fo repaðrið—lagç a lign con saus mentagler e leum.|The meal was a relatively simple one prepared by Gevel and Tim before Ludrick got home—stringlace with mince sauce and greens.
Y pan fo un pog bruslað atorn dell'orlaç ma y ligt gostan fort aðief por engollisc farvent valir, cos particuler posc untal jorn commovent.|The bread was a little crispy on the edges but the rest was tasty enough to be worth scarfing down, especially after such an active day.
Caye tan cæros prestabr yon vole Ludric toð novel de sy figl yembr.|It was also a great opportunity for Ludrick to catch up with his children.
"J'oy tu a un religion minour soluð," dis Ludric ag veðerrem dy figl.|"I hear you’ve started a minor religion," Ludrick said to his middle child.
Gevel se dau scoul e gembondau cant sy fraðr fragns a ricottanç gesper.|Gevel pulled a face and groaned as her brother burst into breathless laughter.
"Jo nole ac cair," dis i.|"I didn’t mean to," she said.
"J'er fabr visant—"|"I was aiming for drama—"
"Gent son oy tempr costroint sur scaðr platcouf," sceu Mothe digr, ant spal soccoðent.|"People are putting shrines up on rooftops now," Tim managed to get out, his shoulders shaking.
Jo so l'oc beint por my dolour youdar.|I'm drinking this to numb the pain.
Deut es ustolment por y femn voluð.|Manners are essential for the aspiring wife.
Lour y veðerrem es tal ouveg cos nuvr.|Their eldest has been so sullen lately.
"Ac eu nos y cæros," dis Halina.|"It’s such a chance," Halina said.
"Un çaucr Promethean ag pie nostr!|"A Promethean society on our doorstep!
Tu poð noc rovar ig jo le stim cojan.|You can’t tell me not to be interested.
Incossirabr es nos neleu nossy vecin reconnoscr deut all'ig complið par sy fraðr deur veint annað."|It is absurd we shouldn’t speak to our neighbour because of what his brother did twenty years ago."
"Par sy—" Vadim tis vars parol.|"What his—" Vadim groped for words.
"Sy fraðr devastau tout.|"His brother ruined everything.
Impossibr es tu vel ig pardonnar!"|You can’t possibly forgive that!"
"Sy fraðr sta i," dis Halina cos obstinaç.|"That was his brother," Halina said obstinately.
"Nos posseu y bel amigtað beudar vars Segr Connic—"|"We could extend the hand of friendship to Sir Connick—"
"Luy stant amig a cour dy Segnour Diabolesc e ci Promethean eð orgy recevent!"|"Who is bosom friends with the Devil’s Lord and Prometheans and has orgies!"
"Ah! Jo save sceyen orgy."|"Ha! I knew it was orgies."
Vadim fo vuglað ne rackesc.|Vadim choked on his vodka.
"Jo dey le prohibir.|"Absolutely not.
I no's soiç idone por tey."|He is not a fit acquaintance for you."
Tan lovastr es ty sour por toð gent sauraun en oy.|Your sister's so gossipy everyone will know about it now.
De lou's y spien de kenopleus ja vescuð.|They kept the dream of space travel alive.
Jo sente magn voluð ne jubon de cogr.|I felt very sexy wearing a leather doublet.
Cou fort y ci hour kervandal; vale y manoir aziaus lon broit.|It was deep into the hex hours; the manor should have been silent.
I fo entrað gra de luy, y port gliðant apar e closiscent por toð y ci hou e hurislanç d'autr venatour y noit furtiviscent ablegar.|He’d let himself in, sliding through the door and closing it to keep out the hoots and rustles of other, noisier night-time predators.
No'r sceut alcun sign de við lonc y banc dy floy cant l'au y majon approismað; i n'au alcun lumner vis tras port, eð i vis alcun oy for sy lucern fosc.|There had been no sign of life on the riverbank as he’d approached; he’d seen no lights from outside, and saw none now beyond his own dark lantern.
Deye sceir alcun son deur y crasc de bosc veil s'idoneïsant par un noit freit de Novembr, eð y ronganç de Sr Gosbarrick, eð y spaið e kic avenent pront la Challow Ardan ovroy y port all'askouð e volau y diadem de Balkdere.|There should be no noise except for the creak of old wood settling in a cold November night, and Mr Gosbarrick’s snores, and the scrapes and clicks coming as soon as Challow Ardan opened the door of the saferoom and stole the Balkdere diadem.
Toð cas ig l'aziau calm gelað, ant y pousson dy cour se quinant ne ci oregl, dec l'au foudent uncos oïð.|All the same he stood frozen, his pulse thudding in his ears, because he’d bloody heard something.
Y scoutour me yettaurn scadom pouðr.|The audience pelted me with rotten tomatoes.
Jo cossir tell'yam rascettongandessem.|I find your uncle more fascinating.
J'ay me caut orbeutað d'un coronc ovart.|I've been swindled by a blatant impostor.
Nell'oc capparol voum nos un survol accommettr dy ci autranç cas barðment compostion, cas frameð musical, cas apprestanç de melody e harmoin, cas con- e desjogntur deur y model preluïscent, e cas y detaxion de costum mondial con particulertað vecin.|In this chapter we shall undertake an overview of the changes in instrumentation, in musical structure, in melodic and harmonic structure, in con- and disjuncture from the earlier styles, and in the detaxion of global traditions with vicine particularities.
Reconnosc dant all'experiç de Monçating con y barð, commettreu nos parmy scaumel ag toriot.|In light of Monçating's facility with the instrument, let us begin in the pipe family with the torriot.
Pre y siecr novoç, y ci (vangard dy) toriot e barð scaumel cosvour a ton mogn ayen cos usual un yevot sou dou doblanç eð un dureç limitað sad par y defait de lodrigneth modern vars jonc taglar.|Before the nineteenth century, the (precursors to the) torriot and similar low-pitched pipe instruments generally had a range of less than two doublings and the lack of modern reedmaking techniques severely limited their volume.
For posc l'yenç de forað pedal—adaptað des mechanism tarront par y peria nadasvarm madrayan deur plusour dezein—poðen sofflour a toriot sy tac mogn parnommað acavar (e cos final y nom 'picq tonneðr' valir) tan e sell'yevot alto clar voutent.|It was only with the advent of pedal holes—adapted from mechanisms pioneered with the Madray peria nadaswarm some decades earlier—that torriot players could reach both its famed low notes (and finally be worthy of the name "little thunder") and the startingly clear alto range.
"Inacavabr es soup a kigmau pascr con digntað, donc nel attendr," avars i, l'oc Laum forniscent de pudour dec i n'aye ja stað attenent.|"It's impossible to eat lardon soup with dignity, so please don't try," she remarked, which was embarrassing because Will hadn't been trying.
Nos parsisceum sull'yevot d'œculux.|We learnt about the electromagnetic spectrum.
Cal yevot a l'oc colluy indrec?|What is the scope of this charity?
Cal bourg parsisceu tu dessur?|Which town did you learn about?
Com bustr, l'eç bourg de Nausçod n'Istr Boral e de Lagcousc (temporane cas mandað Laicouche ne Willem Fransc), stant sevrað a for 21 stadion colombant eð y primer stant situað dessur d'un tartonc arð, poun mout fagl se cavir lou meðes a sgart.|For example, the towns of Nausçod on Borland and Lagcóch (at this time officially Laicouche in French Guillenne), being only 21 stadion apart as the crow flies and the former lying atop a steep promontory, are often within clear view of each other.
Pre y sar campaner, por un lettr accaçar des l'un vars l'autr vel cair covallar ag havan d'Ausbagn lor trasir ne ferscip, eint plausibr a Heller sur tarmagn e soulor eint veg ancour a Texel.|Before the steeplemesh, to send a letter from the one to the other would require riding to the port at Axbane and taking a ferry, likely to Heller on the mainland and then across again to Texel.
Posc y campaner aerian jognsern y stuer (y ci oseir entrpos recas for candon cayen contingent nievrous; candon caye bel ant ciel azur accommissibr sta y vistanç cos direct par un veðr illabond) vars y fin ag dezein 1830, no sceye plu besogn antal aðendr expatiant...|After the air-steeples connected the strait (the intermediate baskets only being necessary in conditions of weakened visibility; on clear days the sighting could be accomplished directly via a farseer) in the latter years of the 1830s, no such diversion was necessary...
J'ay un desc farrago nos cogt.|I've cooked us some hash.
Jo traseu y cogn un rað illabond portant.|I went round the corner carrying a fold-up bike.
Jo vos lau ag treu dy ci xiphar.|I commend you on the loyalty of the henchmen.
Vin eð autr beçon yeustað stan reconnuð com matier possent contamen coïr des y Mitað-Asc, e lembic cadarað denent cavibr generallessem ny siecr seç parmette a Arnoutszen de le rannuðar durant sy gran homily sur curaçon.|Wine and other fermented drinks had been noted as a preventative of infection since the medieval period, and the wider availability of distilled lembick in the sixteenth century allowed Arnoutszen to recommend it in his great treatise.
Y ci avanç dy Paç Lonc menau ag descovart de solution ja effectuallessem.|The advances of the Long Peace led to the discovery of yet more effective solutions.
Y molin por salpeðr (costroit por lou fornir con poið dy kynous a pouvr neir cant ðe mancaurn depost tesqual) ne Zampanagar e Tacday Ancor pres se sarvoirn de vreic marin com matier cru.|The saltpetre mills (built to provide a source of the gunpowder component in the absence of natural deposits) of Zampanagar and neighbouring Tacday Ancore made use of sea wrack as a raw ingredient.
Ne 1778, lonc y narrað dy surveilour por y ci molin a Contare, un vapour onðiçastr er remarcað montant des cuf rejeitancer y despart con vitriol seyon maneyað afont.|In 1778, according to the reports of the overseer at the Contare mills, a purplish vapour was seen rising from disposal vats in which the waste was treated with vitriol.
Ja oc eus neðan kiglau tu y vec!|It's just as well you missed the bus!
Des sovaugr mesveu jo y jainç tauger.|My pride blinded me to the bigger picture.
L'eç mersc recievn un doujug veunt frail.|These wetlands have a delicate ecosystem.
Sou y lumner dell'aubon joun, y citað de Bilvau lougeu com gem.|In the early morning light, the city of Bilvaw glittered like a jewel.
Azenar sente com un rat luïr n'un darsou magn car.|Azenar felt as though he were a rat in a very expensive maze.
Y stal zajadau dy marcað nogtorn accis par lamp fumer eð y lun fragnt de mar receven cos equal party a domn pescour pevr jarras e fenogl gostant tan e ci nobr robað n'ornament fluibond ant queldin raut frigsað ne papir cerous.|The night market's motley stalls lit by smoky lamps and the sea-shattered moon welcomed both flocks of fishwives sampling jarraspepper and fendle as well as notables in flowing finery carrying quick-fried suppers in wax papers.
Azenar se tisseu pall'aucoum, colombant scur vars y canougf a fais blau dy vancry particuler nommað par sy cosvour nell'ig tarsc pres illeibr y nuverrem.|Azenar weaved through the crowd, making a beeline for the blue-striped awning of the particular mariskery named in his cousin's latest nigh-illegible note.
Necun dy conjuraçonnour a gifar roug prefait ben ci costojan descos la se mettoirn a vijon.|Neither the expected red-shawled accomplice nor any tipped-off guards presented themselves.
Sceye vray, portan, un farrago ragostant de fler a sal eð ougl ammonent cas mendrem un repasc valibr.|There was, however, an enticing melange of salt-oil scents promising at the very least a worthwhile meal.
Jamay n'ayen ðe un bourg uvrauterrem vis.|They had never seen such an idyllic town.
Bon, j'aye hoir tu fos yert ancour.|Good, I was worried you were still awake.
Me scey foy all'anim candon y stel sgardar yert.|I feel a fire in my soul when I look up at the stars.
Cascif es tu rondant coll'eç quomodolibet?|Why do you hang out with this libertine crowd?
Cu sta y scrittour dy Codex Mysarnos n'aun gent jamay saut consecter, e l'oc livr nil declarar aïr l'argument soluð;|The author of the Mysarnos Codex has never been conclusively identified, and this book will not pretend to have done so;
certan a comparaçon es ig l'er nijommað—ben toð cas preu depostað—ny Majon Livr a Sagnt Jorsc y Martyr, un respanendessem dy ci edifiç afont dy quaðeglad cligser ja svoccað.|what is relatively certain is that it was composed—or at least first stored—at the Library of Saint George the Martyr, one of the largest buildings within the aforementioned church complex.
Vray queglant es nos poum despondr de regest a sodaltað sceint eð enter por cascun dy monastir eð autr facultað divers nell'ig zon tras y siecr seç enter ben pres, ig inclus moustr lonc lour við por bempart parmy lou.|What is frustrating is that we have access to extant and complete membership records for the various monasteries and other institutions in the area for almost the entire sixteenth century, and biographical information for many among them.
Nentamen, nos veim alcun soumoin des un soul chronic ja existant ag forganç dy Codex Mysarnos.|Nonetheless, no mention is made by any of the surviving chronicles of the production of the Mysarnos Codex.
Nos raðaum tras quaðeglad lonc camin attriboit.|We biked across campus along designated lanes.
Vel my tarsc d'acat me soumonir posc nostrell'yenç.|Please remind me of my shopping list when we arrive.
Ðe ern y hey pegntant a roug.|They were painting the fence red.
J'ay hey pos all'obægerrem.|I've cordoned off the sicker people.
Veraçter, may a doç scourmer ny Phœbos sou mac Kellot saven arabesc parolar un pog toð cas; l'eiðel commarcer brittesc e morracan ern surponent ne Gal e Spagn pres dou siecr all'oc hour.|In fact, more than a dozen crewmembers of mac Kellot's Phœbos had at least some Arabic; the British and Morrack mercantile domains had overlapped in Gaul and Spain for nearly two centuries at this point.
Dou parmy ben may le scavoirn plen suet, neðan parolaurn—y caðarn a mission circoler par al-Hamid remane ja intradoit vars latin, e l'aïða nauganç cos imparsoubr.|At least two were entirely fluent writers, if not speakers—al-Hamid's book of circular functions was as yet untranslated in Latin and was an invaluable navigational aid.
Lor pres inacavabr es y magntud a humour sur y Cynthia sou al-Casmi figurar cant, posc sojornar ag vest lontanessem plausibr a alcun hom par toð y histoir d'humantað, i parvenoy cos final Moharram 924 un loy pres connuð.|So it is almost impossible to imagine the height of emotion on al-Casmi's Cynthia as, having travelled further west than anyone in quite possibly the history of humanity, it arrived at last in Muharram 924 somewhere almost familiar.
Y ci racont seyon oïð dy cartograph des l'Occas Jagerrem sevent, y scourm najaurn lonc y rimmot vars y citað treborth de Sinquan.|Following the stories they heard of the map-makers from the Far West, the crew travelled along the coast to the port city of Sinquan.
J'ay neyað a y bon solution augrimar.|I've failed to calculate the right answer.
Nos annexaum y parform con funambr follour.|We enhanced the performance with tightrope walkers.
Jo's roglfiant cas teudesc lepçan parolar.|My spoken Lepsick Dutch is getting rusty.
Lonc y façon la ageurn y Roman allors tras l'empir, y ci traitment sagntað e ci divintað ja existant all'Istr Boral tradugsern ðe ny caglou e reforgaurn ðe ny jout dy pantheon romannesc.|Much as the Romans did across the rest of the empire, the pre-existing sacred practices and divinities on Borland were interpreted through the lens of and recast in the mould of the Roman pantheon.
L'oc poðe font aïr des comport magn naðusc doujugher—com bustr, y veðerrem veneraçon por Nahalennia lonc y rimmot souðer eð auster all'istr, luy stant un deves de commarç e dell'ocean, denoy incorporað de raçon inconnuð con y cult por Pluton e luy deves runið vars sy femn Proserpina.|This could be based on really quite tenuous analogies—for example, the old worship of Nahalennia along the southern and western coasts of the island, who was a goddess of trade and the ocean, was absorbed for unclear reasons into the cult of Pluto and she was syncretised with his wife Proserpina.
Ci autr deitað stan vecinaðessem ben jogndessem indesbroiðabr sur particulertað geographic, e cossy sceint stan compliscabr lon dolour com part all'œcumen religious de Rom.|Other deities were more localised or connected inextricably to particular geographical features, and as such could be incorporated painlessly into the Roman religious landscape.
Just exact com Tamesis ne Britannia e Sequana ne Gal, y floy noscon oy nommað Reim er alcant parsonfiað com y deu Reagimos.|Just as there was Tamesis in Britannia and Sequana in Gaul, the river now called Reim was once personified as the god Reagimos.
Casc gent veurn y sagntroðes all'auter.|Everyone saw the priestess at the altar.
Nos erau y Nil gaddant aval n'auror.|We were motoring down the Nile at sunrise.
Y molin produg alcun zucar des insorgent le quariçtovaurn.|The mill hasn't produced any sugar since rebels sabotaged it.
Baron Monçating y sest fo nað par Segr Josua e Domn Evangelin durant yarn l'an 1770 sur lour dominion ne Launembrig.|The sixth Baron Monçating was born to Lord Josua and Lady Evangelin in the winter of 1770 at their estate in Launembrig.
Segr Josua, cos incoïbr, sta luy meðes un parsonaç querellabr ny melle damvaðesc deut a raçon plusour:|Lord Josua, inevitably, was himself a controversial figure in Damvath society for several reasons:
stant un ivan des y staddomain cappatian,|having been born in the Cappatian staddomain,
stant marið con un nobr ant caðen ancestral waranesc (recent magn demay por pudour vetomondin suffigr),|having married a noblewoman of Warnine descent (far too recently for Vetomundine sensibilities),
e final stant y barony de Haubrath tramis par sy cosvour scon stemn posc finisceu un calver legal un dezein vant (parmy provost y longessem disputað a histoir borallesc).|and finally having inherited the Barony of Haubrath from his second cousin following a decade-long legal battle (one of the longest legal disputes in Borland history).
Luy decident apres y grad sindr broyar e cossy for Monçating retenir sta y coup occeint poll'idea dy mendrem aïr a convenibiltað.|His decision thereupon to dissolve the senior title and retain only Monçating was the final nail in the coffin for any hope of respectability.
Jo save noc tu aus cosvour scon stemn n'Ambrosia!|I didn't know you had second cousins in Ambrosia!
Querellabr es oðr l'ig imascry fos vray meðes volað.|It's debatable whether that sculpture was even really stolen.
Y scavour cossy sceint poð noc hand dar all'hom poið.|As a journalist, they cannot have sex with their source.
Par surcresc, l'accaç campaner baric sta nuverrem aðief a noc ancour l'ançan doujug a gonfan e lamp destarrir, magn afferjarant tras Spagn, Gal eð Italy.|Moreover, the barrick steeplepost was still so young that it had not displaced the earlier flag-lamp system, widespread across Spain, Gaul and Italy.
Deur certan exclusion (cos celeberrem y fil Cracou a Bitom ne Pologn souðer), debriscellisað er y tar prest ag respanment d'accaç filað tras Europ aust e norðer, e vray des l'eç polity receveu nos y majortað dy tarrouçon cas astrapophor nell'Asc Asteller aval.|With some exceptions (notably the Cracow-Bitom line in southern Poland), the ground was clear for the spread of wired post across northern and eastern Europe, and indeed it is from these places that we get most of the barrick innovations of the late Workshop period.
Lor y ci tachygraph filað primal stan fatuous por laurar e tan car por accarr—doutr allors sceye pog advantaç savibr a edifiç marcant, possent cos fagl hur dar an coutoccour ja suet cas y model d'Adamich.|So the early wired tachygraphs were cumbersome to use and expensive to get hold of—and furthermore there was little incentive for businesses, who could simply hire a tapper already fluent in the Adamich system.
Jo's debriscellisant por scoy d'un seman a scitation.|I'm laying the groundwork for a piece-of-cake exam week.
Taçað neðan y madarc avartr!|Shut up or you'll alert the cops!
I coutoccau y tambour agil eð exact.|Her drumming was deft and precise.
Cayen ciel de neir fosc encoster, aguilað par murðon stel lougent.|The sky was a deep, inky black, studded with a myriad glittering stars.
Y lun oppos bagna l'œcumen sou un lumner argentastr, ombr jaint lonc tras y ci tombr dallottað.|The full moon bathed the landscape in a silvery light, casting long shadows across the rolling hills.
L'arbr hurislan sou un bris fresc, un frigçon dant ag font dy tors a Samir.|A cool breeze ruffled the trees, sending a shiver down Samir's spine.
I se fassau y mantel atorn sarraðessem e porseveu a un camin trovar tras y makisaç.|He wrapped his cloak tighter around himself and continued to pick his way through the undergrowth.
Soutan oyeu Samir coroc d'un bachet ados.|Suddenly, Samir heard a twig snap behind him.
I volteu raut e lor attenoy par un pog d'hour, ci oregl sforçant, ma tout taçoirn.|He spun round and waited for a few moments, straining his ears, but all was silent.
L'ençau tornant a sy camin reprendr, ma uncos le quinau starc par ados, le dessoclant vars tar yembr.|He turned to continue on his way, but something crashed into him from behind, knocking him to the ground.
Nos erreu l'oc kessandar coram fin a bogr defassar.|We have to discuss this in person before we can make any progress.
Toð my famigl promoun kireðam y regnanç anthracit.|My family all fully support the anthracite government.
Ðe aun niaç a fuyo pall'eç dou annað.|They've been living in sin for two years.
"Ac vespr, bossir," saluðau y livrer, y test ponent nacleu d'un façon stant cortal e conjuraçonnant y dou—a veg meðes solemn demay por un vocationner ma parcevent cos manifest demay por un actour doit.|"Good evening, sir," the bookseller said, inclining his head in a way that was both courtly and conspiratorial—at once too formal for a tradesman and too obviously self-aware for a trained actor.
"Jo crey noc nos ayau acconnosc.|"I don't believe we've met before.
Jo dign Brandon Cavendish."|I'm Brandon Cavendish."
"Frederick Walton, thein vostr," respos Frederick, y man offriscent.|"Frederick Walton, at your service," Frederick replied, extending his hand.
Y pogn de Cavendish sta sec e freit, luy man soccoðent cos starc lon skassar.|Cavendish's grip was dry and cool, his handshake firm without being crushing.
"Soð vos ac por gilaçar, Sr Walton, ben n'un tom particuler tenent all'idea?"|"Are you here to browse, Mr Walton, or did you have a particular volume in mind?"
"Nien de tal apprestment," dis Frederick.|"Nothing so planned," Frederick said.
"Jo so nuvr alandað des Goring e donc un novel misol a leir recarnt auvorn."|"I am recently arrived from Goring and in dire need of some new reading material."
"Lor soð vos venuð ag bon varous," dis y livrer par un sourey plait.|"Then you've come to the right place," the bookseller said with a smile.
"Vel jo te mostrar ig noscon vençað."|"Let me show you what we have."
Dagormay erra i sy parol robar volonter.|From now on she'll have to choose her words wisely.
Jamiscað plu, casc hom!|Stop complaining, everyone!
Jo hoir nolir jamay lour neðolmar.|I'm afraid I'll never fit in with them.
Samuel e Clovia son megl s'aðelent casc veg lonc ig ðe reun a repaðr de schol, malgrað y noçon de lourell'instroyour sur y sfondranç dell'Empir Mitað-Asc sein vreçous.|Samuel and Clovia do better for themselves every time they return from school, although their history tutor's opinions on the collapse of the Medieval Imperia are execrable.
Jo prefay ðe seraun y dou entrað ny melle pre poðir l'oc tom a diabr editar, a sgart calscon; Hilgart es deja y vessonary depegntað examinant ne spien ig nos veleu se mostrar ne barstant pre Març (jo pieð neðan tu svoc capel jos luy!).|I expect they shall both be in the melee before this blasted book is published, in any case; Hilgart is already reading the illustrated costumery in the hopes that we might all be fashionable by March (kindly do not mention hats in her company!).
Dou opinion soul dey jo rescaur, y volum partenent.|Only two points must I reiterate regarding the volume.
Primer, jo poð bogr cos total Y Mur eð Y Clojon rendr picquessem—vital es y ci mod d'ouvranç de Hadrian ne Brittan e n'Istr Boral por nos comprenau lour y doum inequal durant l'asc posc-classic, dec con sy regn vien l'inception d'autonomy dicerrem all'eiðel nostr.|First, I absolutely cannot condense The Wall and The Hedgerow—contrasting Hadrian's policies in Britain and in Borland is vital for understanding their different fates in the post-Classical age, for his reign marks the beginning of our island's greater autonomy.
J'ay spien y heloit vos treubr noc.|I hope the noise doesn't trouble you.
A tu uncos sou y blau trovað nell'ig vessonary?|Have you found anything cool in that catalogue?
Ty fraðr es untal daugnam incaint sceir sy lucr volar.|Your brother's the kind of dupe who'll get his money stolen.
Interim, ny ci region la gent lou adoptan tostessem, y tachygraph surcourn carið cos stoniscent.|However, in those places where there was early adoption, the tachygraph proved astonishingly popular.
Y ci region prepondran citað fort appopulað e domain urban aðoinç rapid souvant.|These were usually dense cities and urban areas undergoing rapid growth.
Ne Safford, com bustr, ja fornið con doujug fondaminal e starc d'accaçment, y joun Bourgmer Crawford surveilau l'instauration dy preu banc redirigent a ambit accacer.|In Safford, for example, which already had a robust postal infrastructure, the young Mayor Crawford oversaw the installation of the first redirection banks in post offices.
Y ci banc tarromoy y model cossy descreibr: un mission dað sera prefis con un scifr muncever (triant parmig, a Makerfell sta i MKF) parmettent ag zygomour d'y mission accaçar apar vars y bon ambit veciner, seut par un scifr majonner (normalisað aval com catr keren e soulor un lettr) eð ant l'eç scifr sceus y mission star tramis vars y bon machin.|These pioneered the system in which a given missive would be prepended with a borough code (for example, Makerfell's was MKF) allowing the switchers to send the message through to the correct local post office, followed by a house code (eventually standardised to four digits followed by a letter) whence the message could be transmit to the correct machine.
Jo me landau y visaç raut nell'evier.|I quickly washed my face in the sink.
Ðe n'aun recas ig tu lou costosc.|They don't need you to protect them.
N'y tarsc nascenç recevent fo jo emplið con baury.|I was filled with panic when I got the birthday card.
Quemant es locutionnar ig cas y plan d'Euclid, dou form mozað calscon son tojorn parallel, oc a digr ðe hamtn un plan parey.|It is good to remark that in the context of Euclid’s plane, all mozate forms are parallel, which is to say that they are coplanar.
L'oc parceuçon a nossy Jarleð menað all'apponment ig form mozað posn un ongit por asmuth posseïr innað, cos equal com se poð un tramou fornir con l'un asmuth des dou ouçon.|This observation has led our Jarleth to conjecture that mozate forms might possess themselves a sort of direction, in the same way that a line segment may be endowed with one of two directions.
L'ongit por asmuth y tesqualessem posseïbr par un form com circol ben scaðr es lon dout l'ongit aut par un orlosc soler.|The most natural sense of direction a form like a circle or square might possess is undoubtedly the sense of a sundial.
Calscon exact vel signfiar ig un cercol ay voltisc soler ben guyer, ne diagram defagl no’s l'oc voltisc depegntar; y vellisqment normal de saget benoçar suffig ac fort just com cas form lign.|Whatever precisely it should mean for a circle to be sunward or awkward, in diagram it is not difficult to depict; the usual expedient of arrowheads suffices as well here as it does for line forms.
Broucabr a bas es vencr ne vellisquant.|Winning by using a rules exploit is less fun.
Y fruyour gliðan tras l'area guyer.|The dancers went anticlockwise round the plaza.
N'yement e l'aucoum bacchabond veint save jo bon aïr par y convoc sbolognant a toð mell'amig.|When I arrived and saw the orgiastic crowd I knew I’d been right to make all my friends come with me.
Y livrary meðes aye galleir streit e darsoval, ant scaffal anneyað par tout entr picq descovannet e rig enter emplið de tom lort.|The shop itself was cramped and maze-like, with shelves overflowing with everything from pamphlets to great collections of heavy tomes.
L'aer aye fler de papir eð encost, malgrað i manca y brum pouvrous figurað par Fred, e lumner aurfiað dy crevoscr accenoy y roum par y ci fenestr larc a jos rout.|The air was redolent of paper and ink, though it lacked the dusty haze Fred had expected, and golden evening light illuminated the space through the shop's large street-facing windows.
Ny cogn jagerrem sceye un gran tablaur gaubanneresc eð un caðer a reðrtien haut ados, eð ag mur ados ancour penoy un cart citaðer immanessem a toð ci jamay seyon vis.|In the far corner sat a large mahogany desk with a high-backed chair behind it, and on the wall behind that was hung a map of the city larger than any he had ever seen.
jos y caðer azia y livrer, un picq livr nijommað par cogr vert closiscent e sgardant haut por bonjorn luy beudar.|By the chair stood the bookseller, closing a small book bound in green leather and looking up to greet him.
Com suðel eu nos y fenestr zachettað ne closið.|As a hack we've glued the windows shut.
Nuvr ay jo un oblimanç aut vars possenç illimitabr.|Lately I have had a craving for unlimited power.
Vossy loit autoschedon stan magn vraseyant.|Your sparring matches were very impressive.
Un sgaranç deull'ouvr usual de Kiawaman, l'oc fabr zortlasc nos ramen vars y dezein 1820, parmy y scadriscenç dy Paç Lonc eð y commet de Rix Reagent.|A departure from Kiawaman's usual fare, this blacklair tale takes us back to the 1820s, amid the disintegration of the Long Peace and the beginning of Reaction War.
Des y rout accis sou aer ny Boxa autonom vars l'ossatur parsanant de Stamboul, l'oc adaptation dy trevold canonic de Petcov 'Majat Cherveniat' (Y Segr Roug) atten a form redar ag gur e l'enigma ne nossy catr heros sgardar y natur vray dy Zacharia eponym descovrir cos lent.|From the gaslit streets of independent Boxa to the recovering shell of Stamboul, this adaptation of Petcov's classic trevold 'Majat Cherveniat' (The Red Man) tries to recreate the dread and mystery of watching our four heroes slowly discover the true nature of the eponymous Zachariah.
Infeliç es ig y ci bel horam d'œcumen e l'affixion d'un cogmaðer risc tavancin (dont y cainç secuð es majortaðer emprontað des y ci d'Elenor ny livr) sein y zantr soltumesc n'un film scompiglous ceter.|Unfortunately, the beautiful landscape shots and the addition of a rich Tavancine tourist (whose plotline is mostly borrowed from the book's Elenor storyline) are the high points of an otherwise messy film.
Y çavel de ty sour es parnommað.|Your sister's intellect is renowned.
Sceye combat a spað ny zantr dy lasc.|There was swordfighting at the climax of the film.
Y scuir poðe noc le veir, oc gur luy dant.|The boy couldn't see her, which saddened him.
Ny dal dessou splendisce y floy l'arrimbandant con azauc, tandic repars dereðr stan y collin parmy crevoscr raðunant.|In the valley below, the river shone like a ribbon of quicksilver, while on the far side the hills were lost in the gathering dusk.
pog lumner lougen dagaðy, ma ðe sarven soul a y vogdeç dell'œcumen remartellar.|A few lights twinkled here and there, but they only served to emphasize the emptiness of the land.
Matthias soupirau eð ençau tornant a rentrar, ma paravant l'yeme a parcevet cavir d'uncos movent tras l'ombr dy ci arbr.|Matthias sighed and turned to go back inside, but not before he caught a glimpse of something moving in the shadows of the trees.
Ne sgardant de cur may, l'oc surcou un segr pariscent y camin follar nacleu deur y floy.|Looking closer, it resolved itself into a man, who seemed to be making his way up the path from the river.
Matthias forrovau; luy souvenen noc y sigt d'alcun najel hormejað ag quarf, eð y floy trasir ceter vel lontan par najar.|Matthias frowned; he didn't remember seeing any boats moored at the landing, and it was a long way to swim.
Y segr sera donc un vecin, ac yent por sbay dar ag forannour.|The man must be a local, come to gawk at the foreigners.
Cogmaðer son sbay dant ag cascat n'Onnacra.|Tourists are gawping at the Onnacra waterfalls.
Dagaðy floriscen zillapr ny lag.|Buttercups bloomed here and there in the meadow.
Soð vos reusant aðief por surveur all'oc fallout?|Are you canny enough to survive this quest?
Ig degnant nos posseu lon fregn l'origin vecinar por y nom Mendeva (sur un cart surveunt des y veyaç coll'Abanc meðes es scaut terrae mendevalensis, lonc y parol vask mendeval "vest"),|While we can confidently pinpoint the first usage of the name Mendeva (a surviving map from the Landfall voyage itself is marked terrae mendevalensis, after the Vask mendeval "west"),
y benoç dy nom Brasil poll'austessem parmy ci gran istr ambrosian possey un histoir magn mattougleressem.|the use of the name Brasil for the easternmost of the major Ambrosian isles has much murkier origins.
Certan cos anneyant es y nom adaptau y mythos irðonnesc d'Oil Breasail, un heilant a vest d'Irðon appos star covart d'un vel a nievr jamay for l'un jorn par casc set annað.|It is essentially certain the name was inspired by the Irish myth of Oil Breasail, a landmass west of Ireland that was said to be shrouded in mist except for one day every seven years.
Istr stikettað con Brasil ben parol comportant son vis dagaðy sur cart dy rimmot atlantic ny Mitað-Asc aval, cos usual magn picquessem eð austessem ag loy real.|Islands labelled Brasil or similar wordforms appear sporadically on late-medieval maps of the Atlantic coast, usually much smaller and further east than the real place.
Lonc y seucq parlocan zillapr sauvaç.|Wild buttercups grew on each side of the path.
Jo nil lon fregn reuvr pre un meis ben may.|I definitely won't come back for at least a month.
Ðe ern plait de heilant yembr.|They were happy to be on dry land.
Nell'eç ouvr a Carvallo—l'oc preu livr no stant for y primer parmy un rig de doçan—ern introdoit plusour dy qualtað natural por un racont masquiral, e sell'ouvr lou accomblaurn primer accougl com untað cohernt.|It was Carvallo's works—this first book being only the first in a dozen-strong series—which introduced many of the essential properties of a masquira tale, and first presented them together as a coherent whole.
Com bustr, Jalico forgau pres solter y noçon dy romanç kevlar ant heros deyent un sonc preçous accarr a mesur d'un vellisqment convoluð straccanç e delusion partenent;|For example, Jalico almost singlehandedly creates the conceit of the kevler in which our protagonist must obtain a valuable item by means of a complicated scheme involving trickery and deception;
nos reconnoscm y parol meðes nel y jout sarvir durant certan hour, dec un inceuçon borallesc aïr.|note that the word itself would not be applied to the trope for some time, as it is of Borlish origin.
Y sonc mout un jovagl, se poð stimar ig masquira va parallel con y costum cathayan veðerrem de fabr tapsue (pig).|Often an item of jewellery, masquira is said to run parallel to the older Cathayan tradition of tapsue (magpie) tales.
Nos veyau lumner ag goðou dereðr.|We could see light at the end of the tunnel.
Ðe son flagitant lour y port jamay zamicar.|They're insisting they never lock their door.
Y tas smuïsceu pront la y paið quinar.|The vase shattered as soon as it hit the floor.
Y heloit dy sorty ern affauðað an zoum remot candon Guilmet follau y galleir vogt ny manoir apar.|The noise of the party was a distant hum as Guilmet wandered through the empty corridors of the house.
I sovemblau con y deit lonc l'adornment plu nell'eutað, y motif convoluð tragçant par ogl.|She ran her fingers along the unfashionable wallpaper, tracing the intricate patterns with her eyes.
L'aye tojorn l'oc majon amað; l'oc er luy parið com un cas-sey-apart a mesur dy ci meis stival stendiscent entr period scholer, ci yonoscon sell'aldr quïscen y tombr sodal por poðir escapat fair tras Mendeva.|She had always loved this house; it had been like a second home to her during those long summer months between terms when her parents had shut the family home to go gallivanting across Mendeva.
I tornau par un cogn e lor yeme paus avant un portrait larc sy granpaðr depegntant.|She turned a corner and came to a stop in front of a large portrait of her grandfather.
Y vesson reit noc obstroint, y segr ny pegntur luy apparisc magn; ðe ern meðes fornið d'ogl parey.|Besides the stiff dress, the man in the painting looked much like her; they even had the same eyes.
Nos trovaum un seucq forgað de laprot.|We found a path made by rabbits.
Nos nolau hur dar for an svattour noscon confiabr.|We were only going to hire a PI we could trust.
Cain Celest e Marca un per fouceur.|Celeste and Marca make a handsome couple.
Prinç Peðer Tamaha, heir men connuð des y dynasty hasinic famous, a admis por y nonçamen trey mil murðon de pois deïr (oc dou mil myriad de tron surcontant) com sculd a colluy speculatour e tan a tesoir païsal tras y tarmagn des Mascic vars Ambrosia.|Prince Pether Tamaha, lesser-known son of the illustrious Hasinick monarchy, has admitted to the press that he owes thirty million poise (over twenty million trone) in debt to speculation companies and to national banks across the continent from Mashick to Ambrosia.
Par surcresc, sy granpaðr y Rey a refusað le sauvar de decoxion, stant jainç a dað lon preluïscment.|Furthermore, his grandfather the King has declined to bail him out, in an unprecedented move.
Postulation jaçol es convencuð ig y joun prinç (oc ayent un jubilation opulent de nascenç trentem receut ny Davarn Heul fevruer nuverrem, ant may de cinq mil d'assistour) no's lon hiat sy redon despardent eð y scurtað dell'askouð parent confiant.|Longtime speculation has held that the young prince (who hosted a lavish thirtieth birthday celebration in the Davarn Heul this February, with over five thousand attendees) has been regularly running through his funds and relying on his family's coffers.
Y centuir de vossy fraðr tein dou lau dy castel.|Your brother's armies are 4 miles from the castle.
Hau, ty diac no’s quic!|Hey, your mic’s off!
Nos benoçaum y hiat por douçur acatar.|We used the interval to get sweets.
Forn pog may a deg meis sceut des l'annihilaçon dy mont, e caye je sy nascenç.|It had been just over ten months since the end of the world, and it was her birthday.
Kimmela au l'un je nascenç jubilað abord dy kenonaut deja, durant y gyr por mantien.|Kimmela had celebrated one birthday on board the voidsailer already, during the maintenance gyre.
L'ig au un jorn teut con allagrtað e spien, e lor un sorty souvr no'r parið tesqual a bas a respirar.|That had been a day of happiness and hope, and throwing a party had seemed as natural as breathing.
L'oc annað i poðe alcun jubilaçon vray dijarr lon jant.|This year she couldn't stomach any real celebration.
Kimmela gasau pall'oscbou veðr vars y vogt semnað de stel atras.|Kimmela stared out of the viewport at the star-strewn void.
L'oc sta bel, de façon freit e mortal, ant stel noc lougent yon parmig splendisce y Sol ja briglandessem for com picq.|It was beautiful, in a cold and deadly way, with untwinkling stars among which already the Sun shone only slightly brighter.
Se poðe y Tar foscað de fum fos visibr pall'appragl ny kenonaut, ma i douta.|The smoke-blackened Earth might yet be visible with the voidsailer's equipment, though she doubted it.
Y sovragl seyon me dað er adornað par fylau.|The belt she gave me was decorated with crows.
Ða vos nouð l'occeir jo met laur coll'un man!|If you won't kill him then I'll do it myself!
Ðe ençan y dou voug cas toriot luïr.|They're both useless at playing torriot.
Y premendessem sta l'aðoinç de commovenç viking lonc y rimmot.|Most pressing was the inexorable rise in Viking activity along the coast.
Gazou ag banc dy Sein e l'Orn ern inceut ci meis paravant, ma dagormay ðe spanoirn ag vest; y monastir a Landvennick meðes se cof incendiað a cainç l'an 888 N.|Raids along the Seine and the Orne had begun in earnest some decades prior, but now spread west; even the monastery at Landvennick was burned to the ground in 888 N.
Necun no'rn y commovenç dy dannesc vecinað com piglment; ag dou cost dy Canal caf batman benoçaurn l'instabiltað politic (oc a digr y sfondranç vessaxon ag norð eð y ci querel lombard ag souð) por eðegl concarr e fragossau instançar.|Nor were the Danes' activities confined to looting; on both sides of the Channel war leaders took advantage of political instability (the collapse of Wessex in the north and the Lombard disputes in the south) to conquer territory and settle.
Scey evidenç ig gent dannesc reseyen doutr meðes y flou Vir, oc stant part lonc y tarm fransc e domnon com l'er traitað nell'Accord Catumagin dy siecr ogt,|There is evidence of such Danish settlement even past the Vire river, part of the Franco-Dumnonian border as agreed in the eighth-century Catumagin Accords,
e portan posc y Fransc concedoirn solemn l'oc feu ny siecr deg e cossy corporalisaurn Normandy, y Vir remaneu y tarm.|although when this fiefdom was officially ceded by the Franks in the tenth century to form Normandy, the Vire remained the border.
Se poðe noc l'eç rumour d'un batman corroular.|The rumours of a vigilante were unsubstantiable.
Pront jo vis pall'oscbou my sour cocinant.|I immediately saw my sister cooking through the hatch.
Y cambr ayen pieðry nuaç nell'eutað.|The bedrooms had fashionable exposed stonework.
Ant captanç particuler scey y ducað carniol, oc cos remarcabr y citað abondant de Veron gournant, tan eð eiðel uvrautr austessem.|Of particular interest is the duchy of Crain, which importantly controlled the prosperous city of Verona, as well as fertile lands further east.
Ig i declarau sy promotion dy Papacy Roman er plausibr nastiðessem des faibiltað a des farvour religious vray, ma toð cas final l'aye un eðegl parfait por contriboir ag Batesm dy Norð.|Their declaration in support of the Roman Papacy was likely more pragmatic than out of true religious fervour, but in any case they were perfectly positioned to contribute to the Baptism of the North.
Degnant ig l'Ordr de Sagnt Hemma all'Aug Calm (y Convey Australier) fosn y Batesm condugnt con soutien moneðer de Taxon a Hongary par dezein plusour, sou contingent dy Secession German denoy y Batesm un accommission prement.|Though the Order of Saint Hemma of Still Water (the Convoy Australier) had been leading the Baptism with monetary backing from Taxon of Hungary for several decades, it is in the context of the German Secession that the Baptism became an urgent project.
Con Hermene II stant un novel pap totalistessem, sceye hoir ig Augsbourg sceus heresy respandr rapidessem a vel Rom y Norð parvenir.|Along with a new, more totalist Pope in Hermeneus II, it was feared that Augsburg might spread heresy faster than Rome could reach the North.
Scerraun doç batesm ac fait l'oc jorn.|Twelve baptisms will be performed here today.
Nos luïsceu primer nell'orn.|We're first on in the programme.
L'ivan asseye sur y ranscel dell'orn.|The child was sat on the rowan's branch.
Y scuir dau un soçavau losc ne parmanent a pie.|The boy muttered a rude remark and kept walking.
Michæl flaðrau l'immoubr yert vars y routel dessou, casc broit minuscr oyent com menaç.|Michael clambered down the building to the alley below, conscious of every tiny noise.
I save lon alcot vole Sara hour passar pre smarcr; sell'attent surcayen tor veint minut teir, e posc y fin parvenent den sy deit ern gelað e l'aye se convencuð ig y costojan ayent y rout follað trottant sta a pognt de retornar an moment calscon por l'accusar d'emboscment a flannar.|He had no idea how long it might take Sara to emerge; in the event it was about twenty minutes, by the end of which his fingers were icy and he was convinced that the policeman who had strolled along the street would be back at any moment to accuse him of lurking with intent.
Ma cos final i sta yent, accappelað e fassað de rob, con y valigs.|But at last she was there, in hat and coat, with the suitcase.
I l'oncau par pas plusour fin a Michæl smargoy deull'ombr e le prenoy de sy man.|She lugged it a few paces until he slid out of the shadows and took it from her hand.
Cascif eð vos un lon-lembic convoccað ac?|Why did you invite a teetotaller here?
Y gent ne Safford Outr tein 440 murðon.|There are 4.4 million people in Utter Safford.
Son ðe nervous d'issaur ny cors?|Are they sure they'll win the contest?
Ma neðan carrug mettr avant naumagl, retorneu ag citað yon a nossy racont sy commet.|But lest we get ahead of ourselves, let us return to the city where our saga begins.
Y citað a Mysarnos es l'ançan cafloy ny Principaltað de Mystra, un stat mordether stant vassal sou Rom des y siecr onç fin a sy dissolution com issent parmy ci dy Rix Romannesc dy siecr settoç.|The city of Mysarnos is the former capital of the Principality of Mystra, a Roman mordether vassal state from the eleventh century until its dissolution as a result of the Romantic Wars in the seventeenth.
L'oc nom es tan denuð cos janual l'ig benoçað por y bourg grec vecin ja sceint (stant tardessem corporalisað cos solemn com un muncef de Mysarnos) connuð nell'asc antic com Pylos.|The name has retrospectively also been applied to the nearby preexisting Greek town (which was later officially incorporated as a municipality of Mysarnos) known in antiquity as Pylos.
A sy sommet ny siecr seç sta Mysarnos un mojol por y commouð revitalist, ant un pouvlanç teint pres trey murðon.|At its height in the sixteenth century Mysarnos was a hub for the Revitalist movement, with a population of nearly thirty thousand.
Me valois noc y fabr assistr con my maðr.|I shouldn't have seen the play with my mother.
Ðe feirn mordeth amont por y poið dy Nil trovar.|They went on an expedition to find the source of the Nile.
Da mey toxen pront la Yam Olau veir.|Alert me as soon as you see Uncle Ollie.
Nossy vecin all'aust n'aun jamay y pinnacr mont respanent acavar dy gent Breðon cas asteller e foyer.|Our neighbours to the east have never matched the globe-spanning workshop and household vanguard of the British.
Nentamen, ða meðes par proximtað soul, y lengaç anglesc son cos parmanent vanagl borallesc adaptant de jaçol com y Mitað-Asc.|Nonetheless, if only by virtue of proximity, the English languages have been adapting Borlish terms even from the medieval period.
Com bustr, degnant ig nos ligau y ci siecr tost nell'Istr posc-roman con migration des Albion vars Istr Boral (cos particuler, par issent dy reduction markesc d'Anglia Auster ny siecr nouf),|For example, while we associate the early centuries of the post-Roman Isles with migration from Albion into Borland (in particular, after the Markish subjugation of East Anglia in the ninth century),
eç parol com danny "un treublant, applattiscent", bather "baðr con fil" e parren "sojornour, un alandað, corrovað" entraurn Veðr Anglesc des Veðr Boral ny siecr deg soul (lonc lour y preu yenç ne chronic de monastir).|words like danny "a nuisance, an irritating person", bather "stringed musical intrument" and parren "traveller, newcomer, novice" enter Old English from Old Borlish in the tenth century alone (according to their first attestations in monastic chronicles).
L'er jou follant cas l'empley all'ambit acceptar.|He was on the fence about taking the job at the bureau.
Mettau noc carrug avant naumagl; ja n'eu nos y muncef meðes saut.|Let's not get ahead of ourselves; we haven't even left the borough yet.
Dou xiphar hurstaurn glay e me lou svingaurn.|Two mercenaries picked up swords and brandished them at me.
Obligað no's un sautel lonc demay cas figuration por y despley ondatim benoçar por regest exactessem augrimar dy gyr de corp cisjovial.|It does not take too great a conceptual leap to use the waveform display to compute more accurate records of the gyres of cisjovial bodies.
Vray, pre y siecr novoç tost ja encontrau nos prefaction magn tranq de conjonction planeter Ixion envount ny scaunç dell'astronom ambrojan Fabian Mostàf,|Indeed, already by the early 1800s we see very precise predictions of planetary conjunctions involving Ixion in the writings of Ambrosian astronomer Fabian Mostàf,
granfigl dy mathematurg Raymond al Mustafa oc meðes ayent aïðað a y fondamen de methodic defassar deur cinquant annað.|grandson of the mathematician Raymond al Mustafa who himself had helped develop the foundations of methodics a half-century earlier.
Nell'oc asc er Mostàf laurant all'observatoir de Paratzon ne Brasil auster e noc obstroint y sar campaner parvasiscent se cous progression,|At this time Mostàf was working at the observatory at Paratzon in eastern Brasil and despite advancements in the spreading steeplemesh,
collaboration tras l'ocean atlantic remanen lent, descovart plusour sceint fait cos istrað ny Novomond e Vetomond y dou.|collaboration across the Atlantic remained slow, with several discoveries made separately in the Novomund and Vetomund alike.
Nos venau de retornar posc sortir ag vousc.|We had just got back from a tryst together.
Bosc d'ollem sarf a bog fair.|Elm wood is used to make bows.
Tu a birgasq oc aubon—te cay cal fallout?|You look happy this morning—what're you up to?
Y porrujon cercondaurn y preu taug enter ny palaç, e donc au Matthias prudenç fait por y cogn reconnoscr ant asmuth vars y rugment dallottað.|The balcony ran around the entire first storey of the palace, and Matthias had been careful to note which corner faced the rugged uplands.
L'aer sta fresc e clar, eð y porrujon sta pres vogt d'alcun hom.|The air was fresh and clear, and the balcony was almost deserted.
Caye freit demay por y plurem dell'host cas Escriva vinn sou y ciel ovart eð admirn la y sigt, eð y ci autr hom pog sur y porrujon stan haft demay ne collocq por y corp angost ne rob fosc parcevir dimeyant lonc y mur.|It was too cold for most of the Escrivas' guests to stand out in the open air and admire the view, and the few other people on the balcony were too busy chatting to notice the slight body in dark robes edging along the wall.
Lonc exact l'aðendr sceye un lumner blau e febr, ignau aðief a visibr apen, appariscent ny ciel norðer just dessur dy loffocq.|Precisely on schedule a faint blue light, so soft that it was barely visible, appeared in the sky to the north just above the horizon.
Nos aum issaur magn je ados, bro!|We won so much yesterday, bro!
Ðe ern l'imascry descorçant ag cogn jagerrem.|They were peering at the sculpture in the far corner.
Deð lour gevou cant y rafayat revin.|Give them a heads-up if the tailor comes back.
De toð y ragost a pescot meyon provað lonc y rimmot solary ne Barcelon e Provenç (noc obstroint y desc unic a pallort eð olif me sarvið sur y ci play ne Mayorca), alcun den poð acavar ag Rey Jagm.|Of all the fish stews I sampled along the solarium coasts of Barcelon and Provence (not to mention the singular mussel-olive dish I was served on the beaches of Mayurca), none compare to the King James.
Surnommað cos vecin eð ant tendreç y jaumetia "picq Jagm", l'oc ragost pren sy nom de Jagm VI (1691-1749), y monarch de regn y stendiscendessem ne Barcelon des stablir a 1067.|Locally and affectionately called the jaumetia "little James", this stew is named for James VI (1691-1749), the longest-ruling monarch in Barcelon since its establishment in 1067.
Degnant ig sceusn ragost comportant ny region pre sy regn, y majortað sarven for toð y mansc consumir oc remanent des y vanc d'un jorn.|Although similar stews existed in the region before his reign, most simply functioned to use up whatever seafood remained from a day’s catch.
Y Rey Jagm es parcanç y preu desc untal cogt por gra de sey, e certan val por issent l'ottem luç ben hus benoçar, ben untal pescot blanc.|The King James is perhaps the first such dish made for its own sake, and indeed should for best results use hake or haddock, or a similar whitefish.
L'eç aldr aun ja un tarç dagr me rent.|With these parents I've been neither fish nor fowl.
Quisteu raut neðan y davarn sey haft.|Let's call now before the hotel's fully booked.
Jo comprene noc sceye pallort ny farrago.|I didn't realise the hash would have mussels in.
Un bustr l'oc eutað dessur contradignt es Vascony; l'oc a graç a profit novomondin des pelur eð autr enascment un aðoinç cas pouvlanç souvað de 1500 vars 1550 (Portingale noc ig inclus) com issent d'immigration.|One counterexample to the above trend is Vascony which, thanks to Novomundine profits in furs and other goods, actually saw in increase in population from 1500 to 1550 (excluding Portingale) due to immigration.
Y fin dell'Ascenenç Vascon con y Var dy Dou Quen vole denou mettr ag model feudal ne Vascony pre fos y siecr fis, portant.|The end of the Vascon Ascendancy with the War of the Two Queens would end feudalism in Vascony by the end of the century, however.
(Val svoccar ig l'oc no sta kynous y dicerrem vars y model feudal finir nell'aust, yon y ci concarnç islamesc de Kieu e de Cazany russesc souvartoy y nobiltað cos colombandessem.)|(It is worth mentioning that this was not the main factor in ending feudalism in the east, where the Islamic conquests of Kew and Russian Cazany upended the nobility more directly.)
L'un effeit parcanç imprefaibr dy diminution dy model feudal sta y reitfianç de ley com cod suntuer.|One, perhaps unexpected, effect of the decline of the feudal system was the strengthening of laws such as sumptuary codes.
Jo no poð lou affaçar pre vienn y flottisc.|I can't confront them until reinforcements arrive.
L'eye doutr y verroil ant deit pernix.|She picked the lock with nimble fingers.
Sy coðelostað er ençant a nos tardir.|His caution was starting to slow us down.
Y cociner ença voug cas hojol ne sarzin.|The cook was terrible at buckwheat pancakes.
Postulað es l'oc roc vien d'un autr gallaið.|There's speculation that this rock comes from another galaxy.
Jo kigla reuvr a mell'orin pre oc annað.|I hadn't been back home until this year.
Y lan a filar se coun pisað cos inequal.|The wool to spin was unfairly distributed.
Vos vouð cas mendrem outr bon me fair par noc desmanneçar a Paris, citað de vareç e carogn, ða meðes tu derra pieç Fransc Ustol parsir por gra de ty fem.|You will at the very least do me the service of not moving to Paris, city of greed and carrion, even if you must learn some Proper French for the sake of your wife.
Dec Hortense oc lerra cos certan, jo vil ci bon vouð de Clara communeyar e rescaur ig vos porreð pront se sarvir dy lencorf cas Vauhan; for carað Marduth ag Tesoir Tyche.|As Hortense is certainly reading, I shall pass on Clara's well-wishes and reiterate that you are welcome to make use of the Vauhan lencorve; just ask for Marduth at the Tyche Bank.
Y scourm de Pether son tan voluð, parisc i, a partir de bel Albion traiçonous.|Pether's lot are also destined, it seems, to leave fair, perfidious Albion.
Ig degnant jo lour day ascuranç continu de xeny oy ðe son resoluð sur najar lonc y gran flou mendevan vars un ventur calscon seyon trovabr a Hasiny.|Despite my continuing assurances of welcome here they are determined to sail the great Mendevan river to whatever future they can find in Hasiny.
Jo dey admettr ig y sigt de murðon de lau teir entr mey e casc hom teudesc es formous naðusc.|I must admit the prospect of being thousands of miles from any Dutchman has its appeal.
Y dou tarnaç laundaurn ne sortir.|The two regulars stumbled as they left.
Cant scandr jo care garaf idone.|As I climbed I looked for convenient handholds.
Nell'oc molin jo ploug jonc vars haidy.|In this factory I process cane into rum.
Jo n'ay scið l'eç scoclet epu plu pascr.|I can't stop eating these mini chocolates.
Seyað clar con ig voscon desirað svellar.|Be clear in what you want to express.
L'indrec son stoccadant vars parroc demosin.|The charity is lobbying for public parks.
Te val casc joccon presument jannestar.|You should ignore all the smug jokesters.
Jo's oyent ig l'area ne Veron se recarra ovart a parform ancour—dit es Al Igne, l'ouvr de Bruno, sera y primer la parformað posc y var!|I hear they shall reopen the arena in Verona to performances—they say Bruno's Wings Afire will be the first shown there since the war!
Jo broucau con hugt sy fraðr Jacom connoscr pre jamay sta i reconnuð cos mondialessem (ne pariscenç ðe aun y dou un heu equal cos stoniscent, ða meðes stant jammel); nos eyeu a loit accougl a Houlm ne 21.|I had the pleasure of knowing her brother Jacom before she was ever known to the wider world (apparently they are astonishingly similar in appearance, even for twins); we fought together at Hulm in 21.
L'ig gazou a se caut mesgournað cos horfiant eð lon alcun fegnment y var prolongað lonc meis—pu jo no dey l'oc invectif souvr neðan jamay le quïr.|That was a horrifically-mismanaged offensive and in all honestly prolonged the war for months—but I mustn't start this rant, or I will never end.
Jacom n'aye nien fait for sy sour e lourell'aldr lavar, toð cas final (ig degnant un quil quemant desirar eð y convoc de Frioul an asc paçous sevir volois lon fregn sy memoranç influïr), e donc no poð jo nien fair for te rannuðar all'oc melodram.|Jacom had nothing but praise for his sister and their parents, in any case (although the desire for a warm bed and the call of peacetime Furlaine no doubt influenced his recollection), so I cannot do anything but recommend the opera to you.
Nos javigaum toð y majon livr por detaxion cas aur.|We searched the whole library for syntheses involving gold.
Luy sceye un min a vabiantað bogr mesveibr.|He wore an unmistakable look of misery.
Y cat venoirn aç seðel aposc.|The cats came forth in droves.
Indigneð mey noc dell'oc baugl van.|Don't hold this bad set-up against me.
Posc cay prinvir porreu nos alcheðr.|Next spring we can start over.
Faç le noc gavir neðan sy soir ðescar.|Making her have fun will only make her sadder.
Nos som quondant ag loub cant i se caf tos.|We're loitering at the shops while he has a haircut.
Sceye ja ancour un querel ac con Dembro e sy scourm a cimter cas y recostroinç dy naf posc ig l'un dy muðel souvau sfondranç l'an derran.|There has been yet another argument with Dembro and his masons over the reconstruction of the nave after one of the buttresses failed last year.
Y fastig provisour ne bosc pin es parcevibr auvorn, e des l'argument entr Paðr e Dembro l'es menað vars digr y motif senglessem vel ig nos descenau certan pieç dy pieðry deur y cost surveunt e cossy forniscau y naf con fastig for ne bosc.|The temporary pine roofing has been rather noticeable, and Father's talks with Dembro have led him to believe the simplest thing would be to take down some of the stonework from the surviving side and give the nave a fully wooden roof.
L'oc idea aye apen pagrmen encostað pre toll'aucoum ediculat ern tijon svingant, e soulor Zocala venoy aval de sy ci acraç ne moscon por y preu veg dell'oc annað.|This idea had barely been set to parchment before the ediculate crowd were up in arms, and Zocala came downriver from her acreages by moshone for the first time all year.
Alcun de nous ayen ja y novel marið vis, sauf Paðr cant y nuçal gournar, ma Zocala sta soul l'oc veg.|None of us have yet seen the new husband, except Father for the wedding, but she was this time alone.
Jo vusca caldour de souscen neðan cous cingr.|I hoped tomorrow was warm so it wouldn't hail.
Sco livað den!|I'm fed up of it!
Bouð y viker ða i no's ac yent pre haçol.|Text the deputy if he's not here by noon.
Taus gran alcot es y molin rouð faint la?|At what rate does the factory make wheels?
Con tersur psolic poð l'yeustanç de vin lejar.|Sulphites can arrest the fermentation of wine.
Jo montau ag tabr e clignau my bos yert a haut.|I got up on the table and fired my gun into the air.
Fort alcot i quotta y jacquot me souprene.|I was surprised how well the tux suited him.
All'hour yonoscon nos eu tesmogn de ci melody manoscart ny music romannesc temporane, nos veim benoç dy kyriel tras Europ occas, norðer jusc Mondovel tan souðer jusc Baglem, donc arð es sell'orin real definir.|By the time we do have evidence of manoscard melody in contemporary popular music, we see use of the scale across western Europe as far north as Mondwell and as far south as Bagliemmo, so it is difficult to determine its true homeland.
Cay appondr ig y kyriel spanoy des Luberon tras Borgogn e soulor lontanessem par y siecr treç un postulation ant evidenç tan com toð autr, oc a digr alcun entr no's cos particuler suajoir.|The presumption that it radiated from Luberon through Burgundy and outward through the thirteenth century is as well-evidenced as any alternative hypothesis, which is to say not particularly convincingly.
Certain scholer aun soumis ig l'oc asmuth d'influyenç fos vray ados, eð ig y kyriel se cous introdoit ne Manosq par un joun monc ayent le saut des y hammel a sy figleç.|Some scholars have argued that the direction of influence was in fact the reverse, and the scale was brought to Manosque by a young monk who had it from his childhood village.
Jo's eut may hellinar a tu pos figurar.|I've been through more than you can imagine.
Sy benjamin a cedr sta imminuð sad.|He'd overdone the cedarwood perfume.
Panel jattove parlocan y cambr.|Teak panels lined the bedroom.
Mell'acquetta er çarvinot ramenant starc.|My liqueur tasted strongly of raspberries.
Ubictað ablegau mell'yam deur Ommad.|Ubiquity drove my uncle from Ommad.
I n'a y við commercer adoptað con tan farvour com tu aye le vuscað (ben toð cas con un farvour men all'ig yon l'a casc noit jolleyant con amig soldartaç eð aubon a test boscer adoptað!)|He has not taken to commerce as enthusiastically as you had hoped (or at least not as well as he has taken to nights out with soldierly friends and woodheaded mornings!)
ma sy tegnt visacer fouceur cos rumorað pariscn aïr impet dað an congerie a vençon fort san con y ci forniscour usual.|but his allegedly-charming features seem to have contributed to a string of advantageous deals with the usual suppliers.
Tu nil ða j'ay bon scoc recevir n'oyent ig l'eç ensignment boscer poscvaran son neyant a se cavir acatað teint mitað dy taus meðes innajað la (no dign y dominanç de Hambourg sur troc lonc Elf);|You shall I expect be unsurprised to hear that the Potchware woodcarvings refuse to be bought at even half the cost of importing them (never mind Hamburg's stanglehold on the Elbe);
toð cas final j'acavau un conement de Crovatia stant enfoldesc particuler ig l'eç fosn y soul ouvr d'art connuð d'un pouvlanç remot ne Chrysia, oc ayent nossy despart limitað an quantað supportabr.|eventually I managed to convince a particuarly-credulous customer from Crovatia that they were the only attested artworks of a remote people of Chrysia, which limited our losses to an acceptable amount.
Jo cogleu y quesq y maðuressem dy ranscel.|I picked the ripest damson on the branch.
Tag enverimmað con mandrin occeyeu ty quanga.|Your secretary was poisoned with cyanide-laced tea.
Banc redirigent machinal receveurn magn aversion.|Automated redirection banks were met with significant opposition.
Primer dragm ougl raccaldar n'un frigsoir lað e tatover frigsar sur foy preuç un cart hour, mout toglað (fin a y mornç se crostn eð y carn se molfin).|First heat some oil in a broad pan and fry the tattover over gentle fire for a quarter-hour, often stirred (until the pieces crispen and the flesh becomes soft).
Bulb de ceul eð y pevr jarras affigr e ci cocinar longhessem naðusc.|Add in the stalk-onion bulb and the jarraspepper and cook a little longer.
Mistur souseïr, ougl ancour raccalder ny frigsoir, eð y kes frigsar dessur jusc aure.|Subside the mix and heat more oil in the pan, on which fry the cheese until golden.
Tatover e kes condensar eð envouvr cos total tandic aromar con sal e pievr sec ne calscon quantað casc quemant.|Bring together the tattover and cheese and fully involve while including salt and drypepper in whichever amount suits.
Farrago porçonnar ne bol covauclið e ci retenir jos y foy, soulor toð ou coroccar sur y frigsoir savorað e ci frigsar volonter.|Divide the farrago by covered bowls and hold near the fire, then crack the eggs into the seasoned pan and fry as desired.
Cos final casc ou mettr dessur dy desc eð y ligt dy ceul fair scadrir atras.|Finally place the eggs atop each dish and scatter with the rest of the stalk-onion.
L'agent dy Majon Roug souseyeu l'ig scard commoðer.|The Red House agent dealt with that resistance group.
Hour alcot es tu y toriot hoissant?|How long have you been playing the torriot?
Caye trencaç yon jo venoy primer n'Ausbagn.|It was freezing when I first came to Axbane.
Albert me suggereu por te scaur primer, e lon nien for hugt ay jo l'oc fait; ne bon mont voun ty bel nau caressem m'amusar n'encost com ne voç, ma toð cas final jo no poð kiglar pieç appariscenç sentir de vous.|Albert suggested that I write to you first, and I was only too happy to do so; ideally your witticisms shall be as entertaining on paper as in person, and in any case I cannot help but feel some kinship with you.
Nos som y ci dou tog pluottant jait deur y niaç a Paðr por deïr gilaçar soul.|We are the two fledgling sparrows cast out from Father's nest to fend for ourselves.
Jo so certan y vertað suraðoint; lon fregn pos y Rey un sunt calscon de puvon fornir con vitagl|I am of course exaggerating; doubtless the King can provide for any number of wards
(ða cos indignant alcot sceint acceptað; ty ci crevoscr con Paðr no stan parcanç tan retenuð com tu speraus!|(no matter how grudgingly accepted; your evenings with Father were perhaps not as private as you hoped!
Veleu nos sengr digr casc gent dessou connoscn l'ig Insoutiltað dy Prinç M ou?), ma ða meðes jo no poð larc jamir.|Shall we just say that everyone downstairs is aware of Prince M's Indiscretion?), but neither can I complain overmuch.
Yon erað vos cuidant cas quelt?|Where were you thinking for dinner?
Jo le stim magn pluottað cos nuvr.|I think he's really matured recently.
Nos eu vitagl aðief por un meis dijarr.|We have enough supplies for a month.
L'eç gran accommission corrogationnal descrein y liesc romannesc, con tan l'eç dezein nolen l'ig stikettanç accarr pre un siecr may.|These great infrastrusture projects characterise the Romantic period, although these decades would not gain that appellation for another century.
L'oc nom es primer benoçað posc y Rix Democratic, candon y mitað nuverrem ny siecr settoç er stimað, lon raçonnabiltað, stant un final d'asc aure cas reloðeç e civilisation.|The name is first used after the Democratic Wars, when the latter half of the seventeenth century was seen, nonsensically, as the last golden age of refinement and civilisation.
Defagl es comparaçon noc fair entrell'eç stat insoler e querellant n'Europ ny dezein 1660 e, com bustr, y ci gran veyaç geoscopic de mac Kellot eð al-Casmi ny siecr derran, ben l'envou novomondin replenið ny sevent.|It is hard not to contrast these insular, squabbling European states of the 1660s with, say, the great geoscopic voyages of mac Kellot and al-Cazmi of the previous century, or the renewed Novomundine interest of the next.
Nentamen, nell'oc asc es ig poum nos y cart modern e suetessem vistar ençant a smargr tras Europ.|Nonetheless, it is in this time that we can see the familiar modern map begin to emerge across Europe.
Nos corrogau alcheðr l'oc treborth.|We're redeveloping this seaside resort.
Y reloðeç ag tarner sta aplattiscent.|The host's gentility was irritating.
Vos kiglaust y liesc je sont Avril.|You missed the 7th of April deadline.
Set recoglt de savon e d'ougl landant son oy eliminað deur y misol a varous posc tesmogn de conement ant orteyanç gra se caut par benoç den.|Seven soap and washing-oil products have been removed from shop shelves after customers have reported severe rashes after use.
L'eç recoglt (troveð enonç total n'affis) son abrangent a bar vençað dy colluy connuð Pax e Candeller.|The products (for a full list see insert) include bars from the well-known cleaningware companies Pax and Chandler.
Narrað svattour suggern y blasmabr sey un lot impur a copros lauric de natron, un matier fameyant addað cos respanent n'ougl e bar a savon.|Early reports suggest that the culprit may be an impure batch of natre's laurick cuprose, a foaming substance widely added to soap oils and bars.
Gimmolt vars l'origin dy contamination furtivir n'aun solution yent, ma y defait de bustr comportant referið des y ligt dy març d'enascment de Libya (dont Istr Boral innasc y majortað dell'eç ivorc alchemic por detaxion) appen vars ig y spin vel y molin poliscent a Haldanvion hamtar.|Efforts to trace the source of the contamination are as yet inconclusive, though the lack of any similar cases reported in the rest of Libya (from where Borland imports the majority of these alchemical products for detaxion)'s export market suggests that the issue may lie with the refining mills at Haldanvion.
L'oc enonç es abrangent a my nom ou?|Does this list have my name on it?
Jo fon got ag mar cay dou meis.|I've got nothing done for two months.
Jo groça y stoir geoscopic de my fraðr.|I envied my brother's globe-trotting tales.
Ma lon digr alcun nell'Empir Constant noncupað ayen tan autonomy com Cornou e Dorogn, eç ayent ny siecr amont y hagr vital contriboit por y concarnç norman de Cantuer.|But of course none were more independent in the so-called Constant Empire than Kernow and Devon, who a century earlier had been vital to the Norman conquest of Kent.
Cos vray, ne 1121 y Rey Vigo de Magn Dorogn vole Cambry gazovar lon approu ben soutien dell'Emperour Roger II.|Indeed, in 1121 King Vigo of Greater Devon would attack Wales without the support of Emperor Roger II.
Roger II passau y bempart de sy regn a Paris, ant ig sy fraðr postir Matheu regna por gra de luy a Londr.|Roger II spent most of his reign in Paris, with his younger brother Matthew ruling in his name in London.
Je 1120, largeç des y tesoir dell'empir er ja spent a fin oc y tarm lonc auster contr Willemy defendr.|By 1120, much of the empire's treasury had been spent on defending the long eastern border with Willemy.
Cos particuler, y costroinç d'un novel Gran Castel a Vesonçon fo complið l'an amont, stant y pognt final n'un rig costojal y lign entr Flandr eð y Montagn Alpin afferjarant.|In particular, the construction of a new Great Castle at Vesonçon had been completed the year before, the last point in a defensive line spanning from Flanders to the Alps.
Jo vis y fabr all'Auspeç Impareïbr noncupað.|I saw the self-styled Peerless Seer's stage show.
Nos se ponau voud a sy vellisqment dehiscn.|We looked forward to his plans falling apart.
Zi, sco'n bal n'oc ort.|Yeah, things're looking up.
Interim, valibr es prudenç fair neðan l'eðegl travodaðer starchiscent dy païsanry cas lour y segnour feudal mescomprendr com ða un planfianç abrangent dy ci doujug grader nell'Europ dy siecr seç.|However, one should be careful not to construe the strengthening negotiating position of the peasantry with respect to their landlords as a broad levelling of the hierarchies of sixteenth-century Europe.
Ne loy plusour apportaurn autortað central (cos usual monarch, ma all'idea remainn y republic latin—particuler Provenç—tan eð y ci patriarchat auster) veloç n'assaut y possenç degredient ag nobiltað vecin por poðir lourell'un meðes condensar.|In many places central authorities (usually monarchs, although bear in mind the Latin republics—in particular Provence—as well as the eastern patriarchates) took swift advantage of the local nobility's declining power in order to consolidate their own.
Com bustr, argutað es ig ne Rom l'oc proces menau colombant vars y Gran Fragnç e donc vars l'accession dy Triunvirato (may la den ny Capparol 13: Art e Theory Revitalist).|For example, it has been argued that this process in Rome led directly to the Great Fracture and the accession of the Triunvirato (about which more in Section 13: Revitalist Art and Theory).
Nos som travodant posc je semman ados!|We've been in negotations since last week!
Innogbr son y ci hautessem ny doujug grader.|The higher-ups in the hierarchy are untouchable.
Se poð jo nolois cavir validað ag reu.|I might lack the prereqs for the course.
Caye un crevoscr affreidant je Avril joun eð y ci residu final de stað ern gliðant apart con un bris fresc de harvest.|It was a chilly evening in early April, the last remnants of summer finally drifting away on a crisp autumn breeze.
Cos exact y gendr a crevoscr volois Laum faïr passar cas luy ne sy randy quemant tacquaveyan nell'autranç compliscent affignt an scaunç deut a edition je l'aubon ados,|Exactly the type of evening Laum would have preferred to spend in his cosy Tacquave apartment putting the finishing touches on an article due for edition the next morning,
ben parcanç jolleint an tarn beçon scencant con sy colleg por un je nascenç ben munganç jubilar—ben l'explanation doujugher calscon por lembic consumir.|or perhaps out at a bar getting drinks with his coworkers to celebrate a birthday or anniversary—or whichever flimsy excuse for alcohol consumption.
Aglon, l'er aziant n'un manoir a Kevig scaunt dy deshormejanç poll'indrec carið d'un dynast quidam.|Instead, he was in a mansion in Kevig covering the launch of some dynast's pet charity.
L'oc gendr a narrað nel Laum cos usual scaur den, ma Jale Fylaver aye frith a coup se caut e pres luy kestar por y martel prendr.|Not the sort of story Laum usually covered, but Jale Fylaver had come down with flu and practically begged him to take the reins.
Jo me cou battuð d'un hom raðant ag los.|I got hit by someone cycling on the pavement.
Caye un pont a los tras y reu.|Stepping stones spanned the stream.
Jo cur bogr yon nis sbolognar.|I don't care whose fault it is.
Portan ða veleu nos l'annað aval de Wolfstan II de Norðumbr comprendr, nos deyeu sgart mettr a dou siecr amont, ag bon preu gazou viking sur y rimmot d'Albion e d'Irðon.|But to understand the final years of Wolfstan II of Northumber, we must look two centuries earlier, to the very first Viking raids on the shores of Albion and Ireland.
Y racont d'eç gazou comportant sur bourg n'Istr Boral—e sur monastir cos particuler—stan quippe denuð notoir ubic prell'hour yon l'eç spanoirn vars y vest e Halgrive fo piglað ne stað de 824.|The tales of similar raids on Borland towns—and on monasteries in particular—would surely have been common knowledge by the time they spread westward and Halgrive was sacked in the summer of 824.
Nentamen, y reyaum anglesc aun s'apprestað a l'eç gazou (e cos final eç irrouçon) souvar par gra inequal jagerrrem.|Nonetheless, the English kingdoms were prepared for these raids (and eventually, invasions) to vastly different degrees.
Compareð y lot de Lincon marchesc con ig de Yorvic norðumbran: y primer cou jamay, e certan denoy y bourg starchið cos impilaðessem ne Marclont tras y dezein plusour candon l'aye veraçter benoç com y tarm de regn dannesc.|Compare the fates of Markish Lincon to Northumbren Yorwick: the former never fell, and in fact became the most heavily-fortified town in Markland for the several decades it served as the de facto border of Danish rule.
I rob y parol bogr grivlað.|She doesn't mince words.
Com voum nos se corrir pall'oc glonscel?|How will we get out of this mess?
L'er mell'yam sleghant avant my rau!|He was shamelessly slandering my uncle!
Un pog dy bouðr fondr n'un gran paðel scaudr e l'agnel crostar par lot, emmenar an ardois, soulor oc refair a trey rennot d'agnel taglað e trencað, all'ugnlac eð ag morn (tandic l'eç dou derran retenir).|Melt a little of the butter in a large shallow dish and sear the lamb in batches, remove to a plate, then repeat with three trimmed and sliced lamb kidneys, the onions and the carrots (these last two remaining).
Ci yettar con farin dessur, laiscar dou minut, soulor y savoranç e boglon affigr tout parmettant de boglir.|Dust with flour, leave for two minutes, then add the seasoning and broth, and allow to boil.
L'agnel, rennot e fougl a laurer lor y paðel emmenar deur y foy.|Pour in the lamb, kidneys and lorrer and remove from the fire.
Y tatover despleyar ne trenc sur y carn e soulor eç voncirar con bouðr calt.|Arrange the tartover by slices over the meat and then glaze with hot butter.
Eç covauclir e cogr un hour e demy sur foy preuç.|Place on a lid and cook for an hour and half on a low fire.
Candon son y tatover rent fort broun, tout emmenar deur y foy eð acqueldar pront.|Once the tartoffer are well-browned, remove from the fire and serve immediately.
Jo dis noc l'ig meyon inquittað con!|I didn't say what I've been quoted as saying!
J'am çamoc sciftar ag tostuð.|I like to have jam on toast.
Ja sco ne vugl router.|I'm still in a traffic jam.
…tandic y statu quo de prepondranç imperial sta deja mi dehiscent (ant y dissolution dy Preu Empir Drengoçan all'ovest,|…while the status quo of Imperial hegemony was already falling apart (with the dissolution of the First Drengotian Empire to the west,
l'irrouçon Jennesc ag ci Istr Tyrrhen l'an 1207 eð reyaum ne Magref e ne Libya y dou se declarant autonomy l'an 1237 N/634 هـ), y vray bodanç a mort vene com y Secession German.|the Jeanish invasion of the Tyrrhene Isles in 1207 and the declaration of independent Maghreve and Libyan kingdoms in 1237 N/634 هـ), its true death knell was the German Secession.
A mesur de dezein porsevent ag Denonçation Paulin casc ducað sevrað (e cas sporadic casc jarlað!) promoveurn ða Rom ben Augsbourg, un panel de fieltað prest a dirompr forgant oc, lon digr, menau colombant vars y sfondranç dell'Empir German com spectacr fablous.|Through the decades after the Pauline Denuncations each individual duchy (and in some cases each county!) declared either for Rome or for Augsburg, in a powderkeg patchwork of allegiances that, of course, led to the collapse of the German Empire in spectacular fashion.
Se poð envou particuler dar ag ducað a Cragn, oc cos diçr gournanç issarr sur y citað vige de Veron, tan com feu uvrauterrem vars l'est.|Of particular interest is the duchy of Crain, which importantly controlled the prosperous city of Verona, as well as fertile lands further east.
J'ay my pan sciftað a çamoc demay.|I've spread too much jam on my bread.
Y lasc 'Blanc Gahað' a font n'un livr d'an 1890.|The film "Jet White" is based on a book from 1890.
Cain l'eç sonc a vençar for cosogr.|These items are not to be sold separately.
Ustol es ig nos dau grad a œculux par sy mesur, dec nos lour eu envou con de tan façon divers.|We customarily grade œculux by their span, since we interact with them in many different ways.
Lumner ant y mesur cortessem es scadriscent, ant nis suffignt por atom toccar e cossy lou fornir de defait a plentað; dighau l'atom dien defaint.|Light with the shortest spans is scattering, having enough energy to affect atoms and give them a deficit of plenty; we say the atom becomes deficient.
Toð œculux breyessem e penetrant y dou son scadriscent, e lonc ustol se poð certan lumner surblavesc jagerrem admettr.|All shortform and penetrating œculux are scattering, and depending on convention some further surblavic light may be included.
Y mesur y longessem a lumner poðent in experientia un fondamen atomic scadrir es tor 400 magr polç, ja no stant lonc com lumner visibr calscon.|The longest span of light which can in theory scatter an atomic base is around 400 scant-inches, which is not yet as long as any visible light.
Scey hasart ne gran illumination des lumner a mesur tan cort, e feliç es aer avogl y majortað a tal lux nastið par y Sol (pu noc l'entertað, com vil bruslanç tesmognar!).|High exposure to light of such brief span is dangerous, and fortunately air blocks the majority of such luxes that the Sun emits (although not all, as a sunburn will attest!).
Comoscon vouð vos l'oc delit motivar?|How are you going to justify this crime?
Cu 'sirn droughar de nossy taflot?|Who wants to join our board game?
Port i jamay allors de fustagn?|Does he wear anything but jeans?
Ny reyaum catrem, y gran castel sorgent com un casner deur y citað ag mar jonc sta vert.|In the fourth kingdom, the great castle rising like an oak from the city on the reed-sea was green.
Y pieðr dy cost heilander stan covart de mos pille, tandic y bris saler cola sur yarç boscer yeðrot portant.|The stones of the land side were covered in thick moss, while the salt breeze streamed over trellises of ivy.
Y fenestr meðes lughen con veðr zajadau ag colour—neðan y clartað—de smaraud.|Even the windows glittered with jackdaw glass the colour—if not the clarity—of emeralds.
A starn dy mur citaðer naja cos lent y gamblas de sy paðr lonc y canal argent sceint just con y rout leyað, trencant a biasc cos artificial par y mersc paneller.|Outside the city walls her father's barge proceeded slowly along the silver canal which ran parallel to the raised road, cutting at an unnatural angle through the patchwork fenland.
Vray, jusc oy ern ðe passaç faint de tal tardiscenç ig ða y costoscment ern porsief lour dant lor ðe voloisn ja certan star attegnt eð oncað alcheðr vars Tisholm.|In fact, they had been making such slow progress that if the authorities were pursuing them they would surely already have been caught and dragged back to Tisholm.
Jo socquau ne my caðer pille cos ajoutað.|I sank gratefully into my padded chair.
Ascur alcun hom n'a costoscment mis all'yert.|Make sure no-one's alerted the authorities.
L'oc compostion de pont parmet coval menn gamblas apar.|This bridge design allows horses to draw barges past it.
Cas y mesur 'degm' noncupað er tandem l'axiom de se sarvent d'un los soul par casc quantað compromis, e retenuð ern pie e lau y dou ne benoç com mesur a tagl sengr.|The so-called 'dime' measures eventually compromised the principle of having a single base for each quantity, and retained both the foot and the league as primary measures of length.
Y pie er normalisað cos quidam naðusc stant y mojol entr dou mesur un picq pog inequal: y "pie romannesc" eð y "paum accenser" cathayan.|The foot was standardised somewhat arbitrarily as the midpoint of the very slightly discrepant "Roman foot" and the Cathayan "surveyor's span".
Y lau, stant jusc oy irruniscablessem meðes tras Europ ag pie, ern fis a plaç d'un murðon a pie;|The league, which had been even less consistent across Europe than the foot, was fixed at ten thousand feet;
y mesur cas ustol y "migl" vole cavir inclus parmy y mesur degm com cinq mil pie, ben un demy a lau.|the traditional measure of the "mile" would be folded into the dime measures as five thousand feet, or half a league.
L'oc contingent es autrað alcant soul dagormay, candon y pie (e cossy scient y lau) se cou un redefinition ne 1946 por ig y veloçtað normal œ tey cos exact deg gran lau par second.|This state of affairs has changed only once since, with the redefinition of the foot (and therefore the league) in 1946 setting the normal speed œ to precisely ten great leagues per second.
Jo sucq de ty connardaç!|I'm fed up of your bullshit!
J'er nuvr sortið cant cou roçon.|I'd just left when it started drizzling.
Tandem ðe pardoirn nis e fegrn repaðr.|Eventually they gave up and went home.
(i) L'eç entrou cort ac dessou souvr l'Ascenenç Vascon partenent con men a 100 parol cascun.|(i) Answer the following short questions on the Vascon Ascendancy in under 100 words each.
(α) Y plausiblessem es cal hom parmy ci plusour stant soumis com amour de Rey Ambrosc III?|(α) Who is the most probable out of the many people who are claimed to have been lovers of King Ambrose III?
(β) Cal cainç produgs y fonç notoir dy vascel Estellas daus Sanz, oc volent denir ja y scon nau solter acavant l'ocean Atlantic trasir?|(β) What caused the infamous sinking of the Estellas daus Sanz, which would have been the second lone ship to make the Atlantic crossing?
(γ) Carraçon n'au y Var por y Succession Barcelon un liesc a for 4 jorn?|(γ) Why did the War for the Barcelon Succession last for only 4 days?
(δ) Yon trocaurn Vascony den por ci oransc eð autr frugt citron accarr stovent par y Decret Sandrin?|(δ) Where did Vascony trade for the oranges and other citrus fruits required by the Sandrine Design?
(ε) Cant an er poesy vascon l'yamb a 5' exact primer benoçant la?|(ε) When was the strict iamb 5' first used in Vascon poetry?
Sceyen zurç remiaçant precartaðer ag platabac.|There was jelly wobbling dangerous on the buffet table.
Me stou fort y lasc laçar cant i's n'odysse.|I really want to see the film while it's on.
Y preç ag davarn vole nossy jougl.|The hotel's price would be the clincher.
Cay confluyenç dy ci pouvr germannesc ny souð e nell'ovest con y pouvr romannesc nell'aust e ny norð se produgnt for lent, interim, tras y plusour siecr sevent.|The mixing of the Germanic peoples of the south and west with the Romans of the east and north would proceed only slowly, however, for the next couple of centuries.
Vassalaç ja galað vexa y heilant, e conflict afont menan vars concert entr Boral e Sothbar ben entr Boral eð Anglont com issent dy contingent politic.|The question of fealty vexed the land, with conflicts leading to temporary alliances between Boral and Sothbar or Boral and Angland depending on the political climate.
Tandem, ny siecr novem joun y rey roman Stiglan dau sell'heir Marc ne mariðaç ag dottr soul a Alfey d'Anglont, cossy lorry reyaum unfiant e Sothbar sforçant a vassalaç eunovir posc y Battagl a Fendal n'atorn 810 N.|Eventually, in the early ninth century Roman king Stiglan married his son Marc to the only daughter of Alfegh of Angland, unifying their kingdoms and forcing Southbar to pledge fealty after the circa 810 N Battle of Fendal.
Ma a veg meðes yon y contingent treblað n'Istr Boral er toð cas final sign mostrant vars stabiltað, aðoint er y frequenç eð y forç de gazou dannesc sur y bourg rimmer dell'istr.|But at the same time as the tripartite situation of Borland was finally showing signs of stabilisation, Danish raids on the island's coast towns were increasing in frequency and strength.
Jo fey nouf laur mathem ne ðougl ig crevoscr.|I knocked out nine maths problems last night.
Cal mocry son ðe teissent oy?|What nonsense are they spouting now?
Ag port penoy sign scaunt 'Abseïr Jug'.|The sign on the door read 'Keep Out'.
Magn comoscon Istr Boral—tan e largeç allors—vel se contentar n'auteç declarar sull'idea de pan vastel aromað douç, y method sengr (ja pos oc no star lon y form a jonnovar faïð par Istr Boral) vien tostessem meðes all'innascment lað de zucar n'Europ.|Much as Borland—and many other places—might like to claim ownership of the concept of sugar-spiced cakebread, the basic recipe (though perhaps not Borland's preferred buttefly shape) predates even the mass import of sugar into Europe.
Gingembrað apparisc ne siecr doç tandic abatment continu ag Masrecq augta gingembr eð autr març vars l'ovest, eç mout zucarrað par miel.|Inchbread arrives in the twelfth century as ongoing warfare in the Masreck brought inchroot and other goods west, often sweetened with honey.
Postulað cos usual es ig jonnovar son y symbol primer de Naðal sur Istr Boral com un parsonfianç de metamorphos e de við alcheðr tandic y mont mort dell'yarn reflorisc vars y prinvir.|It is usually supposed that butterflies are the primary symbol of Christide on Borland as a representation of metamorphosis and new life as the dead world of winter grows again into spring.
Degnant ig l'oc intermain un fabr starc, eð ig a mesur dy siecr a y symbol dy jonnovar se caut adoptað par commouð divers por l'oc bers meðes complir, y tesmogn historic no's idone antal racont sengr.|While this makes for a good story, and while the symbol of the butterfly has over the centuries been adopted by various movements for this very purpose, the historical record is more ambiguous.
Nos se contentaum a un tatover soul porçonnar.|We made do with sharing a single potato.
Y malvaç cof auteç ag vanc nell'askouð!|The bad guy got hold of the vault's treasure!
Stou joun sgarant effurar dy hal sdroy vabian closnautr.|We need to keep kids out of the abandoned warehouse.
Domaget se sarf dy sgart angost por y lað illuminar par casc taug ny forganç a sy film, e vray veim nos l'eç advantaç n'un tal eðeglment ac dessur.|Domaget uses the narrow view to illuminate the broad in every aspect of his filmmaking, and we really see the benefits of such an approach here.
Ða y belem ern grivlað a se produgr ny palaç e castel a Huzatr e Cartau, defagl all'auditoir vel y comport vistar entr y glonscel cambresc n'Albion ag scon nuçal d'Alexandra a Vascony e sy veyaç famous.|If the scenes were confined to the palaces and castles of Huzatre and Cartaw, it would be hard to connect the Welsh tangles in Albion to the second marriage of Alexandra of Vascony and her famed voyage.
Aglon poum nos y sensation a sculd parental sentir all'abat contr gam sgarant lonc y dou cainç secuð nell'oc caðen filmer.|Instead we can feel the sense of parental obligation warring with wanderlust in both threads of this filmic tapestry.
L'Ascenent vil lon fregn denir siemprtað sull'icon stival, e l'oc merit fort l'ig sign a ðoranç.|The Ascendant will doubtless be a staple of the summer screen, and it well deserves the honour.
Poll'ottem souvanç cavir jo rannuð vos passeð y ralley ne vin empordan beint e n'y plurem cantant a cançon de gloir voscon figurabr.|For the best experience I recommend you spend the afternoon drinking Empordan and singing as many songs of glory as you can think of.
Lorry haubrojoranç er speut bannið.|Their advertisement was swiftly banned.
Salað y vec ag hal sdroy.|Get off the bus at the depot.
Posc je Pasq sta jo nacleu n'oc ort.|After Easter things were looking up.
Des posc y preu enombranç corporal d'an 1840 er venuð all'idea oc orn dar a corporal cos naðeu lonc pondranç mena vars coglenç fatuous ða volir nis prestar a lorry natur alchemic|Since the first periodic tables in the 1840s it had been realised that naively ordering elements by atomic weight led to inelegant groupings when chemical properties were taken into account
(y celeberrem ig stove de raçon starc janthin inquillir parmy sy confraðr detaxional com muria),|(most notably the strong motivation to place iodine with similarly-reacting substances like chlorine),
eð alcun motivation theoretic por eç tal per de corporal trocar nell'orn nole soumission cavir pre dezein.|and no scientific basis for swapping such pairs of elements in the order would be proposed for decades.
A veg temporane, l'occorrenç pariscent lon conjogntur yonoscon ig lonc mesuranç y corporal y legeressem teyen tout pondranç atomic monfiað pres exact com l'ig a aquifex,|At the same time, the apparently-unrelated phenomenon wherein the lightest elements had all been measured to have atomic weights almost exact multiples of that of hydrogen,
cant oc se mantene bogr cas y ci lordessem (corporal tal cojan meðes com es cuivr!), flagita expostion cavir.|while this was not true at all of heavier ones (even such prosaic substances as copper!), demanded explanation.
Ðe aun heu equal cos stoniscent, ða meðes jammel.|They look astonishingly similar, even for twins.
Toll'aucoum ediculat ern tijon svingant.|The whole ediculate set were up in arms.
Enombreu casc corrovað ac yent oc aubon.|Let's rally the morning's new recruits.
Y bourgmer parman n'aiçar de camin ottem vars l'ovest la Lepcy—|The mayor continues to promise better roads out west to Lepzi—
mocry es ig se poð noc l'aðendranç quottar entr ort eð occas e donc stou un noit incommod souvar ag casatabr solter d'Ossatz ant magð a cambr supportabr.|it is nonsensical that one cannot make the journey in a day and must suffer an uncomfortable night in the only Ossatz lodginghouse with tolerable chambermaids.
Jo porray noc creir ig tal corrogation veun patronisment se trovar tandic y garnçon sein sell'aur flagitant,|I cannot see that such projects will find funds for themselves so long as the garrison demands its gold,
e tandic y menaç bohamesc sey tijon svingant dereðr dy tarm souðer.|and so long as the Bohamish menace rattles sabres across the southern border.
Y clavir a y joun Walter hamtað ant zeltað a plaç de sparteç; ja neðan cay noc tan foudent freit tras port oc posseu nos eir allors deull'yevot de sy heloit!|Young Walter has taken to the clavier with zeal if not skill; would that it were not this damned cold outside and one had somewhere to go out of his earshot!
L'Agathin a Famigl soloy ombisc je Viendr.|The Minister of Family resigned on Friday.
Y stuðant parsiscen comoscon ronç monfiar.|The students learnt how to multiply fractions.
Ðe faun music kevr eð y confraðr.|They make stuff like slap music.
Jo nil for vertað—opportun es l'oc edition tan brey posc y solstiç neðan jo pos noc parcanç y ci sodal haubrjorançasterrem ovart concedr ny fabr cortal e historic nuverrem de Dormaget.|I shall be honest—the timing of this release so soon after the solstice perhaps let me better indulge the obviously-propagandist elements of Dormaget's latest historical courtly drama.
L'Ascenenç Vascon tey noc eiðel insuet poll'argent neir, con y Jo so Ambrosc intimessem d'Agochino ayent y parceuçon pouvlancer concreut poll'oc rey vascon durablessem.|The Vascon Ascendancy is no new ground for the screen, with Agochino's more personal I am Ambrose defining the popular perception of Vascony's longest-reigning king.
Nentamen, jo stim L'Ascenent delicat com renarranç por y ci annað commotual posc l'Abanc d'an 1471, maxime graç a sy decijon vars caglou irrayar sur y gent petteyessem ny cort d'Ambrosc.|Nevertheless, I find The Ascendant to be a charming retelling of those turbulent years after the 1471 Landfall, not least in its choice to focus on the more minor personages of Ambrose's court.
Com bustr (ig degnant i parol voug cas vask ny ci pog belem yon ðe vain deur cambresc), Lyneth Madox hamt Jata, un tissour eð y femn d'un moðnaut nell'Entrpris.|As an example (though her Vask is terrible in the few scenes they stray from Cambrick), Lyneth Madox plays Jata, the seamstress-wife of an Enterprise sailor.
Un hour alcheðr lor porreu nos entrquïr.|Another hour and we can take a break.
Cay un ronç cadarað d'ougl tascban.|It's an extract of vanilla flavouring.
Sceyen tor doç stuðant ny reu.|There were about twelve students on the course.
Sporadichessem ma n'alcun cas malvenuð sta argutar a them d'eiðel normant, yon vars sy vigeïtað aurn bempart hom saut enter;|Less common but by no means unwelcome was discussion of the Normans, to whose relative prosperity many left Sodrick entirely;
defagl es l'auvorntað dy depouvlançment kerennar ma nos leum bon argument plusour sull'eç panel.|the extent of the depopulation is difficult to quantify but we read several good arguments along these lines.
Destegnt particuler es l'un stuðant; y doncel avacau a bustr tesmogn suajoir effojar de fraðr trellinc, nað a Moul tor 915 N,|Of particular note is one student; she managed to find convincing records of triplet brothers, born in Mull around 915 N,
e svoccað alcheðr par referenç vars gazou normant sur Marsella d'an 946 N.|and mentioned again in reference to a Norman raid of Marsella in 946 N.
Decevent naðusc sta pog candidat sceurn l'aggressour Duncloð apportar n'assaut con alcun carn—|It was somewhat disappointing that few respondents mentioned the aggressor Dunclothe in any detail—
—noc obstroint ig y stovenç a poið temporane suffibr deur y gravatoir ne Tremonou ren y cort de Rodric travodar defiant assað.|—notwithstanding the lack of decent contemporary sources outside the Tremonnow archives makes discussing Roderick's court a challenge.
Scey tascban demay nell'oc scoclet lessy.|This white chocolate has too much vanilla.
Mell'ouvr irray caglou sur ustolment.|My work focuses on etiquette.
Stoura aïr me cors pall'eç epoc commotual.|I'd like these turbulent times to be over.
Posc y closiscment dy Var Teudesc Primer d'an 1770, Saxony er mi ascenent e brouca auteç sur eiðel may all'ig seyon aut a veg calscon ne sy histoir.|With the conclusion of the First German War in 1770, Saxony was ascendant and controlled more territory than it had at any point in its history.
Cossireð y scaunç de Sneider sull'urbanfianç tost cohernt de Lepzi.|Consider Sneider's writing about the attendant early urbanisation of Lepzi.
Diçr alcot er sy scaunç influïð pall'oc e par y nuçal d'an 1772 entr luy eð Otto Sneider, scholer ag Sterncundhaus?|To what extent did this and her 1772 marriage to Sterncundhaus scholar Otto Sneider influence her writing?
"L'eutað Trevogt macquau un generation de domn e segr astr mirant e donc luy dabr es nis toð cas final vars y descovart vogder lonc mi plaç dy siecr novoç; y vecinanç dy planet Janus par bint Inám, eð y costregnç dy veloçtað normal, com bustr."|"The Voidtale fashion reared a generation of star-gazing men and women and thus was ultimately responsible for the cosmic discoveries of the mid-nineteenth century; bint Inám locating the planet Janus, and the normal speed being fixed, for example."
Diçr alcot soð vos concordant all'oc inquit?|To what extent do you agree with this quote?
Tu desir un beller epu a scoclet lessy ou?|Do you want a mini white chocolate sweet?
Ðe le macquaurn vars surcair un tarç dagr.|They raised her to be neither fish nor fowl.
J'er astr mirant all'hour dou je ados.|I was stargazing until two last night.
Nentamen, y character dell'eç caum vienn dy poið a nou fanglanç preluïscendessem yon no se poð for apponment addoit a them.|Nonetheless, the character of these pieces draws upon yet earlier innovations about which we can only make educated guesses.
Cal teissir, com bustr, des y benoç communal dy kyriel manoscart ne bempart all'eç ouvr?|What to make, for example, of the shared use of the manoscard scale in many of these works?
Lonc ustol figurau nos ig y manoscart fos un orðenjanç borgonnesc dy siecr doç nuverrem,|Traditionally we conceive of the manoscard as a Burgund innovation of the late twelfth century,
origin ayent parmy ci hymn parformað ny communtað religious ag region Luberon auster.|beginning with hymns performed in the religious communities of the eastern Luberon region.
All'hour yon cos final scey evidenç a melody manoscart ny music romannesc temporane,|By the time we do have evidence of manoscard melody in contemporary popular music,
nos veim benoç dy kyriel tras Europ ovester des Mondovel a norð e lonc y camin vars Baglem a souð, e donc defagl es sell'orin vray discernir.|we see use of the scale across western Europe as far north as Mondwell and as far south as Bagliemmo, so it is difficult to determine its true homeland.
Jo componoy l'oc caum por cinq baðr.|I arranged this piece for five musicians.
Rom ny siecr cinqueç sta ven d'orðenjanç.|Fifteenth-century Rome was a hotbed of innovation.
M'orruð ðe ain l'oc sorty erreut cos pernix.|I think they really turned this party around.
Toll'emendanç por y mas son complið, jusc oy, ða vray meðes a i y ci dou rig d'ardois derran allignað cos scaðr.|The repairs to the farmhouse are all done, now, if he really did get those last two rows of slates lined up right.
Posc veg yon final i se descen y gas des nuot vars fastig, oc parisc sigt dijarbr.|When he finally lets his gaze drop from the clouds to the roof, it looks decent.
Noc just exact com valent, nentamen: l'eç ardois aun untal nuvreç eð aplattið ant cogn parfait y catr.|Not quite like it should, though: the slates are so unmistakably new and uniform with perfect corners.
Scey ne bon mont fragnç e lamn jagottað a casc postion yonoscon y glaç joivrau ne japot tras l'yarn e bojau l'ardois a vougheç.|There should be cracks and uneven edges in all the spots where the ice dammed up in the winter and pushed the slates awry.
Ma toð ig es partið.|But all that is gone.
Cay comoscon ða toð ci annað ern diglað, ben ða alcun cainç den n'er bogr occors.|It is as if all those years have been erased, as though none of it had happened at all.
Dighað: neleð me gemir / Ciel seraun yonoscon egreir.|Tell them not to cry at all / Heaven is wherever I fall.
Tu a scaumel lavaç meyon benoçabr ou?|Do you have a spare pen I can borrow?
Orruðe hour laundaus lavaç sad.|It seemed an awful waste of time.
L'ustol es y model feudal stimar defonct cos enter posc 1550 N, ben toð cas deur polity insoler com Borgogn eð Avry.|It is usual to consider the feudal system entirely defunct by 1550 N, at least outside of insular polities like Burgundy and Awry.
Soumis son un diverstað a meyan por l'oc dissolution expondr; creudessem orruð certain parmy a ci autr.|A variety of reasons for this collapse have been suggested; some are more widely accepted than others.
Mout soumont is un tramou de labour sarver deut ag Scon Gran Morrenç, abiltant ig ci païsan ayent survecuð flagitn contingent dijarblessem de lorry segnour.|Often cited is a labour shortage of serfs due to the Second Great Dying, allowing those peasants who remained to demand more favourable conditions from their lords.
L'oc es tesmognað par y conjogntur parceut entr diminution de pouvlanç e liberalisation (tan com hastous alcot a y clas entrpos smargent creut).|This is evidenced by the correlation observed between population loss and liberalisation (as well as how quickly the nascent middle class grew).
Com bustr, Istr Boral sou Joseph III pardoy may a carant murðon gent, un sont de sy pouvlanç;|For example, Borland under Joseph III lost over forty myriad people, one-seventh of its population;
sarvaç (deja a pognt d'exeunt fair) er abolið cas ley d'an 1564 N, ma ant l'ig hour yent i n'er existant veraçter sull'istr tras un generation.|serfdom (already on its last legs) was legally abolished in 1564 N, but by that point it had not de facto existed on the island for a generation.
Me stou for savir ig nos seim scaðr den.|I want to know we're on the same page.
Nos targoim y fenestr de joivr ne spaiðant.|We scraped frost off the window.
Servið son quelt dijarbr all'ig tarn.|They do a decent dinner at that inn.
(i) Deut ag ci havan stapr e ci instançment dannesc entr Dublin e Yorvic, ben ceter, aye y principaltað ne Guineð meyon suffignt por primaltað sur Poves condensar? Souvin ne soumoin y porçonment de Mondovel stant concordað entr Guineð e Sodric, oc stant tesmognað cos parey ny chronic d'Oltogn e de Carleul.|(i) Was it because of the Dane wayports and settlements between Dublin and Yorwick that the principality of Guineth had the resources to consolidate primacy over Powes? Include reference to the partition of Mondwell agreed between Guineth and Sodrick, as mentioned in both the Ulstre and Carlile chronicles.
(ii) Dell'asc vecuð d'Owain ap Blethen—luy rent legender com Ovan de Jolliad, l'amig stival eð enmig yemal por y çaucr arthuric—cal poum nos savir de mout alcot segr cambresc de nascenç ern droughant de gazou viking tandic y fragossau dannesc denen kintaðessem con lorry vecintað?|(ii) What can the life of Owain ap Blethen—rendered into legend as Owen of Jolliad, sometime-friend sometime-foe of the Arthurians—tell us about the extent to which Welsh-born men participated in viking raids as the Dane settlements became more enmeshed with their vicinities?
(iii) Descreyað ant detagl toll'actour connuð abord dy Reconcarnç a Castr d'an 887 N, tan con y contingent politic yon cascun parmy se troven eç ayent menað vars y faction idiosyncras y battagl parlocant.|(iii) Describe in detail the known actors party to the Reconquest of Chestre in 887 N, along with the political context each found themselves in which led to the idiosyncratic alliances on either side of the battle.
Orruð l'occijon commettr con pujoncr jagottað.|It seems the murderer used a serrated dagger.
L'emendanç ottem plagra alcun hom.|The best solution will please nobody.
Quippe alcun hom nil y budr de cay-seg-a-veðerrem svoccar.|Surely nobody will mention the looming elephant in the room.
J'ay spien vos seyað fort parsanað des y mephit dont scavoist vos ne vossy pistol derran;|I hope you are well recovered from the ague of which you spoke in your last missive;
Me stou bogr vos soumonir a cossirar y citað salir fin a fis sera y prepondranç a commarç.|I need not remind you to consider leaving the city until the bulk of the trading has ended.
Inconnuð tojorn es cal contamen foran posn marcant galar, com sceus my granpaðr tesmognar.|One never knows what foreign ills merchants may bring, as my grandfather could have attested.
Y bourg reman cojan equal des vossy sgaranç com sceye pre nossy acconnosc, vos plaç d'oïr.|The town remains as dull since you departed as it was before we met, you will be pleased to hear.
Ja galað, y casatabr dijarbr sull'ig rif meðes surcay issugtessem posc toð gent de nis nell'oc bourg ablegar;|In point of fact, even the decent lodging-house on the strand is poorer for having banned all the interesting people in town;
parcanç ig ðe me parmet jug d'entrar es mal me desconent, malgrað jo vil toð mod me sarvir dy ci sigt la tandic possibr.|perhaps it speaks poorly of me that they yet allow me entrance, though I will at least avail myself of the views while I can.
My granmaðr noloy se bojar cas scadom pascr.|My gran wouldn't reconsider eating tomatoes.
Ðe aun ig rekestað jo faç exeunt lon massant.|They asked me to bow out without a fuss.
Nos erau flannant lonc y rif, ig carnt yon beller acatar.|We were walking down the strand, looking to buy sweets.
Tu am flaut, ma tu am noc l'abysm|You like boating, but you don't like deep water
E tu a hoir de narr, eð y fin dell'oc mont|And you're afraid of clowns, and the end of the world
E tu am lasc, ma general tu vel ðe sein a pog belem bressem|And you like films, but as a rule you think they should be ten minutes shorter
Eð ant eld novoç bajau tu un doncel eð oc t'ajoutaçau la noc y plurem|And at the age of nineteen you kissed a girl and didn't have the most fun with it
E tu brouc y ðeu an pol ig attost prestabr|And you enjoy the thighs of a well-roasted chicken
E fin a tu aus doç tu dorme sou lumner, neðan Bon Jesu volois smargr des vogt dy foscur e lor raug te cavir por ty maðr noc aïðar con sy maðr|And until you were twelve you'd sleep in the light, so that Jesus wouldn't come out from the pitch dark and then get angry with you for not helping your mum with her mum
Ben can noc menar te dignant Pieðr, desig—|Or for not walking the dog who you named Peter, because of—
Or, vis, jamay n'a tu raçon la me dað|Well, in fact, you've never given me a reason for that
Oc abseïð, jo sau tout a teir cas tey|Excluding that, I know everything there is to be had when it comes to you
Jo sau tout a teir|I know everything there is to be had
Y fabr nou scenað t'ajoutaç ou?|Do you think the new play's fun?
Ðe faun flaut casc juglot.|They go boating each July.
Vis no som nos jamay eið a Duncloð.|We've actually never been to Dunclothe.
Naðusc sta l'oc un issent incoïbr de commouð lonc y tarm cambresc;|In part this was the inevitable result of tensions along the Welsh border;
durant meðes l'epoc paçous stendiscent a comparaçon, Theodoric l'Auvast eð Owain de Brochwel y dou aurn jug centuir corrovað magn surfaint por y Lign Severn defendr.|even during the relatively-long period of peacetime both Theodric the Awefast and Owain of Brochwel maintained ever-more levy forces to police the long Severn Line.
Contrig, Yorvic eu sauf a se condonar sou regn dannesc.|By contrast, Yorwick almost gave itself over to Dane rule.
Degnant ig regest suajoir sein ben scarder ben tendençous cos clar (scaunç brethin meðes dell'oc epoc no's enter confiabr),|Though convincing records are either fragmentary or clearly biased (even Brethin writing in this period cannot be entirely trusted),
creut cos general es ig y cort dy scavin l'ablegau preluïscent com çamoc,|it is generally believed that the alderman's court threw him out pre-emptively as a sop,
ne spien de vanc aur aðief oblatar volonter ag gazovour por poðir un devastation total dy citað evitar.|hoping to offer enough treasure freely to the invaders that they could avoid a total destruction of the city.
Y lamp se quïsceu, y coloir augtant ne vogt dy foscur.|The light went out, plunging the hall into darkness.
Nos som gran sviðour a conemir cas sar.|We're big fans of online shopping.
Y tissour aun un exeunt scenað.|The weavers have staged a walkout.
Ne cal comtað, regnað sou Comt Jerron, se prodoy l'Urgenç noncupað d'an 1170, y donjon devastant absoluð e menant vars y secession de Borgogn (e tandem y dissolution) dell'Empir Constant?|In which county, ruled by Count Jerròn, did the 1170 "Emergency" take place, utterly destroying the keep and leading to the secession of Burgundy from (and eventually the dissolution of) the Constant Empire?
Cal gendr de parenteç aye Rey Adalmar a Bavarn con sy hereter Empres Catharin a Germany, y regnour final an Germany unið pre may a cinq cent annað?|What relation was King Adalmar of Bavarn to his successor Empress Cathrine of Germany, the last ruler of a united Germany for over five hundred years?
Hambourg sta y preu citað teudesc a se declarar cos solemn com insouject ag regn dell'Emperour, d'an 1207 N.|Hamburg was the first German city to formally declare as not subject to the rule of the Emperor, in 1207 N.
Ma cal citað, un sodal ny Collijon (y Stadbond) smargent pres possent equal com Hambourg meðes, quottau jout for l'un annað aposc?|But which city, almost as powerful a member of the nascent Collision (the Stadbund) as Hamburg herself, followed suit just one year later?
Mell'amig lou narreyau vars agir temerer.|My friend goaded them into acting rashly.
J'eu sauf a lou sveilar n'ortellent atras.|I nearly woke them up as I snuck past.
Y segr possey linaç aðief por vous dou.|The man has enough parentage for you both.
Degnant ig l'oc declar nole cavir reconnuð cos solemn jusc Borgogn fos vencuð dou annað apres posc y Battagl a Margès, caye l'oc occorrenç ayent l'eðegl de Linaç Amigòt reitfiað com preu entr par por y nou republic.|Though this declaration would not be formally recognised until Burgundy's defeat two years later at the Battle of Margès, it was this event which cemented House Amigòt's position as primus inter pares in the new republic
Toð cas, oc a digr, tras y ci ogtoç annað sevent de manouvr contr un Barcelon famiscent e lour confraðr piratic stant veraçter caf sur Marsegl.|At least, that is, for the next eighteen years of manœuvring against a hungry Barcelon and their piratical allies who de facto ruled Marsella.
(Compris cos general es ig Segr Amigòt [Daniel Menton] stablisceu Marsegl com y cafloy de Provenç cos majortaðer por y flottisc de Jondumal surveilar coðelous; moustr den ne Part III: Veil Jen.)|(It is generally understood that Lord Amigòt [Daniel Menton] established Marsella as the capital of Provence in large part to closely monitor Jondumal's fleets, about which see Part III: Old Jeans.)
Pre y fin de sy regn d'an 1517, Segr Amigòt aye y tarm con Borgogn e Barcelon fis a plaç, ant Narbona ligt sou obligation doblað vars Menton e vars Jaume III.|By the end of his rule in 1517, Lord Amigòt had solidified the borders with Burgundy and Barcelon, with Narbona left with double obligations to Menton and to Jaume III.
Casc ouvr pent ag ci mur stan vondrous.|All the wall-hung paintings were hideous.
Lodrignether l'ig no's meðes un pescot.|Technically that's not even a fish.
Cay sdroy cas sar de jout jagat.|It's an online collection of narrative tropes.
Benoçabr por seucq historic (ben toð cas por y croun dy bon leyour!) son l'Orn a Sagnt Jagm, ant nom dont costroit er y Monastir Peninsoler nossy citað surplombant.|More relevant to history (or at least to the good reader's moneypurse!) are the Order of Saint James, in whose name was built the Peninsular Monastery which overlooks the city.
Fondað ny siecr deghem sou y patronisment de Domn Amegl a Brug, l'orn ern envoluð par un smout pouvlancer contr Geoffry II eð ern forçað a enfugr vars Istr Boral d'an 1067.|Founded in the tenth century under the patronage of Amelia of Bruges, they were implicated in a popular uprising against Geoffry II and forced to flee to Borland in 1067.
Oy es l'Orn (sy nom modern dignant, y Fraterntað Jagovin) cos majortaðer reconnuð por sell'yeustmandry Jaibos e por bempart dell'eiðel atorn dy citað posseyent, ig inclus y loy d'un parmy y ci bagn roman antic yon Ausbagn recief sy nom.|Today the Order (with its modern name, the Jacobin Fraternity) is in the main known for its Jaibos breweries and for owning much of the land around the city, including the site of one of the ancient Roman bathhouses for which Axbane is named.
Nossy bevy surplom y rif par un porrujon annexað.|The balcony in our suite overlooks the beachfront.
Nuvr so jo my seucq historic molinant.|Lately I have been contemplating my legacy.
Surcay l'ig marið de lorry dottr laur un yeustman.|It turns out their daughter's married to a brewer.
Dovem, m'ajoutabr vel improbation redirigir tan com sera parcanç nos prevenibr (cos particuler l'un bougr aquilin nolent my plum teurfiar) eð y ci argument refutar cos direct ny scrit.|Second, I would like to divert as much criticism as we might possibly anticipate (in particular one aquiline fellow who shall not sully my quill) and rebut those arguments directly in the text.
Nell'oc spien, posseu nos y capparol Caf Jammel prolongar por caglou irrayar a comoscon l'Empir Constant drengoçan all'ovest eð y Roman malchassian all'aust y dou issaroirn y Cligs (tras y siecr derran yon unið) por lorry pretension vars continuitað con Rom basfiar?|To this end, might we extend the chapter Twin Keys to emphasise the ways both the Drengotian Constant Empire to the west and the Malchassian Romans to the east used the Church (in the last century of its unity) to support their claims to continuity with Rome?
Jo vil aïr toð y fougl recas pre Reveglon, jo vos aiç.|I shall have written the requisite pages by Revillon, I assure you.
Vacilleð bogr pre respondr jug; Scholer Michæl Bervisson.|Do not hesitate to reply forthwith; Professor Michæl Bervisson.
Y maðr improbau sell'heir posc l'ig fo reluð.|The mother scolded her son when he got back.
J'eye sauf a aïr y hapr yent.|I'd nearly got all the groceries.
Un bougr insuet vien de laurar cas y haprman.|A new guy's just started at the grocer's.
(ii) Nell'istr Albion eð y reyaum Danau y dou temporane sceyen mendranç moulous cas religion eð y Cligs (e lorry gendr calscon) stan ligað cos starc accougl con autortað vecin.|(ii) In both Albion and the Danaw kingdom at this time there were significant religious minorities and the Church (of whichever stripe) was strongly associated with local authority.
Desig l'eç qualtað commun ben ceter denoirn ðe amaçgat ðescant por cogtaçon Contr-Paradis?|Was it these commonalities that made them fertile ground for Anti-Paradise thought?
(iii) Diçr alcot sta y resmargenç dell'Apprestanç Modest ne Spagn e Gaul com effeit dell'eç novel idea religious?|(iii) To what extent was the resurgence of the Modest Arrangement in Spain and Gaul in reaction to these new religious ideas?
Compareð y farvenç de cuidour modest ig inclus y Marchis de Caillat ben Diana Theodora Queiroz y pro-Marian Azur contr y philosoph de commouð preluïscent cosvour a Modest.|Compare the fervence of Modest thinkers like the Marquis de Caillat or proto-Blue Marian Diana Theodora Queiroz to the philosophers of earlier Modest-like movements.
(iv) Lonc vossell'opinion, cu scavoy (ben scavoirn) cos incaindessem l'edition incendier d'an 1799 Et Nous Amerons les Fux (E Nos Amareu ci Foy), un ouvr tarromour cas Theology a Desveyanç?|(iv) In your opinion, who is, or are, the most likely author(s) of the incendiary 1799 publication Et Nous Amerons les Fux (And We Will Love the Fire), a seminal work in Deviance Theology?
Tesmogneð vossell'apponment con poið modern e temporane, e hasmeð dou ben may autr ouçon cas plausibiltað.|Back up your theory with modern and contemporary sources, and contrast the likelihood of at least two other candidates.
Follastr ne vrugheç a mell'accostur teurfiað.|A moorland frolic has got my clothes dirty.
Cay l'ig muncef un amaçgat ðescant vars huyaç.|That district is a hotspot of mob activity.
Tras sougl azia segr moulous un bos svingant.|At the door was a bulky man holding a gun.
Savino y Just, Marchis a Jerusalem primer (ayent grad noblessem calscon refusað) sta, paravant a sell'accession d'an 1119, un sodal ny famigl regnant a cal stat?|Savino the Just, first Marksman of Jerusalem (having declined any higher title) was, prior to his accession in 1119, part of the ruling family of which state?
Y ci cont a pouvr anglesc dy Duc Saðour e sy Band Masquað se produgn cos general durant y regn de cal emperour drengoçan?|The English folk tales of the Farmer Duke and his Masked Band are usually set during the reign of which Drengotian emperor?
Cal fey Nicolà s Avignon d'an 1347 stant rumorað com un rout vars y sfondranç final dell'Empir Roman Dovem?|What did Nicolà s Avignon do in 1347 that is said to have led to the final collapse of the Second Roman Empire?
Un querel sur y postion dy Caðer ne Pieðr Roug entr cal dou stat albic akirtau y Rix cas Fieltað ci dezein parmanent?|A dispute over the location of the Redstone Chair between which two Albic states sparked the decades-long Wars of Fealty?
Cu sta y preu domn stant instroyour an universtað european, d'an 1219 com sodal nell'Universtað Sant'Antonnio a Padou?|Who was the first woman to teach at a European university, in 1219 as part of the Sant'Antonnio University of Padow?
Y madarc yeme lucr de huyaç.|The lawman was taking bribes.
Nos miraum y horam d'un vrugheç lað.|We looked at the wide shot of broad moorland.
Nos stou desveyar por y tragres eluïr.|We'll detour to avoid the parade.
Lampionment baric n'aye presenç deja caut lonc y picq routel yon trovað ern y cambr pijon d'Ivocq, clignað com annex denover entr un livry a tom rediveu eð y tarn svelt Y Dou Ollem façadant vars Rout Veðr Foris.|Electric streetlight had not yet reached the little alleyway on which Ivock's boarding-house stood, squeezed like an afterthought between a second-hand bookshop and the narrow Two Elms pub which faced Old Foris Street.
I quaucau sortent sull'yeul ovart, y stanc passant dessou dell'ig lumner aurfiað de lamp y cercondment bagnant vars un caldour monochrom.|He hurried out onto the thoroughfare, walking through the pools of that golden lamplight which bathed the surroundings in warm monochrome.
Y pian ja vat de ploy ern lousc jaint tandic l'eye tras y rout e desveyau theatrfiour arreloðeçað exeunt faint des y Paviglon e colant vars y quarf souterran y proismessem.|The still-wet cobbles glinted as he crossed the road and dodged theatregoers in their best clothes exiting the Pavilion and streaming to the nearest dusker station.
Con tan cous moglastr l'octobr stan preuç contr y saçon, eð Ivocq remorde l'ouçon de sy dorangot gras pres toð pront.|Despite the damp it was unseasonably warm for October, and Ivock regretted opting for his heavy overcoat almost at once.
Y davarn façada y jogntur de dou yeul ovart.|The hotel was at the intersection of two main roads.
L'oc sorty enter sta tor annex denover.|This whole party was sort of last-minute.
Nos stou y ðanc sveldr pre y rubicon zar.|We need to thin out the crowd before the real competition.
Descorrir sull'ort dy Magl Urban Novel e sur lorry sousunçon ny Collujon, ant caglou irrayant all'aðoinç de Londr lonc y traiscnant dell'epoc d'Atelier Mondial.|Discuss the rise of the New Urban Mesh and their subsumption into the Collusion, with emphasis on the growth of London following the Global Workshop period.
Cos tranquessem, comparaçon fair dy racont de lorry benoç de spionnaç all'Aust por gournment dirigir lonc asmuth san cas commarç con y realtað plausibr.|In particular, compare the popular account of their use of espionage in the East to steer politics in tradewise-beneficial directions with the likely reality.
Valour dar ag postion d'emphas sur y droug d'orðenjanç marin e cos particuler sur y cavibiltað de carbon por y commarç Urban basfiar.|Give credit for emphasising the role of maritime technology and especially access to coal in supporting the Urban trade.
Respos carr ci mostrant ig y stuðant es eið doutr a for y lasc d'an 1968 "Sr Desarden, Prinç Nuçal" sgardar; ig l'es aglon suet ag mesur dy seucq de James Desarden nell'Adminstration Muncever cos equal pre sell'ascreuçon a Nacon Day e posc y scandal d'an 1887 y dou.|Look for responses which prove that the student has done more than watch 1968 film "Mr Desarden, Prince Consort"; that they are actually familiar with James Desarden's career in the City Administration both before his assignment to Nackon Day and after the scandal of 1887.
"Cay zar!" dis jo cant corrau nos.|"It's not a game!" I said as we ran.
Jo sarrau voloppant y dorangot atorn.|I pulled the overcoat tight around me.
My commission hander no's bogr luïscent all'occijon.|My sex life has nothing to do with the murder.
Com es oc luïscent a ney ne Nivon?|"What's that got to do with anything?"
Sur Segr Hendric Cortis au stað y cur fornið por y figl orphan de sy fraðr postiressem candon n'aye Baðot for dou meis eld.|Sir Hendric Cortis had been left with the care of his youngest brother’s orphaned child when Baðot was just two months old.
Segr Hendric e sell'amig e vecin insevrabr Capitan Gafr ayen a catr man y scuir macquað,|Sir Hendric and his inseparable friend and neighbour Captain Gafr had raised the boy between them,
tras annað lorry parrinment vars region divers n'Africa e Chrysia abrejant por poðir remanir cas Baðot tras casc stað candon i repaðre de schol.|for years curtailing their trips to far-flung regions across Africa and Chrysia so that they could be there each summer when he returned from school.
L'aye pluottað n'apponent ig confraðreç fagl lon convolution sou ciel azur borallesc sta un step ny scagl a natur.|He had grown up assuming that easy, uncomplicated companionship under blue Borlish skies was the natural order of things.
Sceint oy, posc un biennial brey parmy fraðr de camp denovant vars sell'apocalyps coram meðes, l'ig parisce Eden soluð.|Now, after a brief two years among brothers-in-arms ending in his own private apocalypse, it seemed a lost Eden.
Hamtour ny cambr pijon teyen dessur d'ogtant.|The boarding house had over eighty lodgers.
My dois nou yent es arreloðeçað auvorn.|My new phone has loads of new features.
Nos creim y droug terraun dessur de murðon pavar.|We think the contributions will total over ten thousand pavar.
Y castel es gran.|The castle is big.
L'es tojorn tars dec Yam Mott parsou ig gent veln le targr, e candon Halinne lour beut bonjorn ðe faun cortiseç e sourey eð exeunt.|It's always clean because Uncle Mott pays people to clean it, and when Halinne says hello to them they bow and smile and move on.
Parveg ða i se ren invisibr i vil lou sevir; i n'a alcun pretension vars spionnaç ben lorry secret jamay descondr, ma scey uncos consolant ny viscr de collocq entr hom crescuð.|Sometimes when she's invisible she follows them; she doesn't mean to spy and would never tell their secrets, but there's something soothing about the murmur of adult conversation.
Ny castel luy scey un quil pille yon i poð ðalleyar dessur com un stelmarin lon meðes un ortegl porrujonnant doutr y tarm.|In the castle she has a soft bed on which she can spread out like a starfish without a toe sticking over the edge.
Tras sy fenestr poð i y havan eð y stivadour ag ci quarf veir, dessou alcot aðief por i pos apen y visaç la reconnoscr.|From her window she can see the harbour and the people on the docks, so far down she can hardly distinguish the faces.
Cant Halinne sta ivan i poðe gringlar tras sy fenestr e lor cair par pog pie vars arp.|When Halinne was little she could tumble out the window and fall a couple of feet onto grass.
Yam Mott am moneð, lon digr, ma i nel jamay oc faïr a plaç de Halinne.|Uncle Mott likes money, of course, but he'd never choose it over Halinne.
A sgart calscon i nil jamay deïr l'ig trianç commettr, dec Halinne nil ceu nien taussar.|In any case he'll never have to make the choice, because Halinne will hardly cost anything.
Oc voscon accommis va contr y scagl a natur.|What you've done is against the natural order of things.
Ajoutaç alcot a tu dell'ascreuçon n'Adighe?|How are you enjoying your assignment to Adigh?
Jo stim y lasc rediveu cos outr.|I find the film totally unoriginal.
Tu aye, com tojorn, bon cos enter ne flagitar aðelent lengacer lavaç aïr (e cartað demay cos enter ne my presenç parmettr!).|You were, as ever, entirely correct to insist on extra language tutors (and entirely too generous in letting me attend!).
Y Latin obligað a se manifestað com vacquer lon kiveu—nos se trovau ny mal çaucr—py y teudesc ac seyon parolað se dien ojous equal com ig dy ci actour flamesc noscon aut posc man a stað.|The compulsory Latin has revealed itself less than useless—we run in the wrong circles—but the Dutch they have here is almost as awful as that of those Flemish performers we had some summers ago.
Jo prefay volir habituar, ma interim jo so gavent auvorn demay ne borgogn e bohemian parolant coll'eç soiç d'Albert.|I expect I will acclimate, but for now I am having far too much fun speaking Burgund and Bohemian with Albert's company.
No scey alcun los ag nonçamen noscon caut d'eromn cas pan?|Does the news we get of bread troubles have any basis?
Nos saveu nien confiar declarað par y hebdomader lepcian sur við ag souð dy Danau, ma y rumour Venis e Crovatia partenent dan hoir aðief; veleð enfugr reunt vars Stoccart ða un sign mendrem bodant ig Bavarn erra vars asmuth parey.|We know not to trust anything the Lepzi weeklies have to say about life south of the Danaw, but the rumours about Venise and Crovatia are bad enough; do abscond back to Stuttgart at the slightest sign Bavarn is along the same track.
Carra je Naðal oc porrujonnant.|Christmas is just round the corner.
pog cossirn lorry liesc scholer la un Eden soluð.|Few remember their time at that school fondly.
Dou cat ern ðalleyant sou sol blanc.|Two cats were basking in the sunlight.
Remanen ceu alcun toscivr ag platabac.|There were hardly any sandwiches left on the buffet table.
My trelamn a blad gringlau tout a coup.|My house of cards collapsed all at once.
Y jonglour fey l'ig bal yemois reunt.|The magician made the ball reappear.
Alcheðr my paðr ençau a grindr n'Avril.|My dad's been dating again since April.
Y benoç de lengaç cas racontaçon poð stroy nos descondr sur y discrepanç entr region n'Albion ayent y sfondranç dy Preu Empir Drengoçan ammonir.|The use of language in storytelling can tell us much about the differences between regions of Albion which presaged the collapse of the First Drengot Empire.
Nossy can am noc eir tras port candon cay moglastr.|Our dog doesn't like going outside when it's damp.
Dou rout ranscellau n'un bosc gauvn.|Two roads diverged in a yellow wood.
Jo sceu noc grap aïr all'outraç tars dell'ig bougr.|I couldn't believe the cad's sheer effrontery.
Cay ouç ny majon livr.|The library is silent.
My sour nil pausar ne parolar de sy cigl.|My sister keeps talking about her boyfriend.
Nos ayau paut ny refectoir jusser.|We'd eaten at the downstairs cafe.
Teyen catorç frend ag tarn candon caye l'occijon.|The inn had fourteen guests at the time of the murder.
Y pouvlanç celtesc d'Istr Boral (y Bora Ale noncupað temporane) no's fort mis a regest.|The Celt population of Borland (self-described as the Bora Ale) is poorly documented.
Y pog bustr tesmogn de lorry lengaç sousonn an dehiscenç for recent des y lengaç britton; creut es ig ðe alandau sull'istr des Albion, e noc des y tarmagn cos direct.|The few attestations of their language suggest only a recent divergence from the Briton tongue; they are thought to have arrived on the island from Albion, not directly from the continent.
L'oc cultur er conjognt ag sar marcer d'Europ par meyan dell'enascment de stan e de far.|This culture was connected to the European trade mesh via the export of tin and iron.
Jarry innajað dell'oc epoc es yent trovað tras toll'istr des loy allors remot com Egypt e Pers.|Imported pottery of this period has been found across the island from as far afield as Egypt and Persia.
Y Celt stan compos ne form de bempart tribu; cascun afferjarau picq region eð er regnað des fortalleç colliner.|The Celts were organised into many tribes, each covering small regions and ruled from hill-forts.
Plaç religious diçr plusour temporane son dessevelið; y celeberrem es y labyrinth a Çadrosc, oc ayent largeç d'apponment lon fondamen cas sell'origin e bers.|Several important religious sites of this time have been unearthed; most famously the Çadrosc labyrinth, which has sparked much unfounded theorising as to its origin and purpose.
Scey un spaiðoir scos ne sy tablaur.|Her desk has a secret drawer.
Jo poðe noc discernir cal seyon sousonnað.|I couldn't tell what she was implying.
Neleð y gran key roug appoyar.|Please don't press the big red button.
Cascif aun y mancel dou colour destegnt?|Why are the sleeves two different colours?
Torneyeð y cout fin a y zygom sey ovart.|Turn the crank until the valve's open.
Jo tossottau eð y camis me moglau con saf.|I spluttered and got juice on my shirt.
Y costoscment aun l'hom sont vecinað.|The police have found the guilty party.
Mell'aldr son magn gehennant.|My folks are so embarrassing.
L'eç dougl nos mestein cascun.|These losses sadden us all.
Y quallour egreye des y convey posc catr lau.|The passenger left the train after eight miles.
Je mell'osceyan jolleyaum nos ag scen.|For my birthday we went to the theatre.
Scey vigt vecin sart all'oc pascman.|This restaurant serves local food.
Cosogr ðe taussan men an haçot a maus.|The set cost less than a bunch of bananas.
Tenguð lousc jaint penoirn dy ci ranscel.|Glittering baubles hung from the branches.
Desselut ratiocinau ig exist un lengaç vital (parmy sy scaunç a luy i le nommau y Parol Divin) present ny ci casel dy corp.|Desselut inferred the existence of a vital language (in her own writing she called it the Divine Word) present in the cases of the body.
Rumour tardessem noc obstroint, plausibr no's ig i stimaus l'oc lengaç hebreu a verb, con tan l'exponois comport plusour ne sell'edition.|Despite later rumours, she probably did not believe this language was literally Hebrew, although she made several analogies in her publications.
D'an 1770 y preu livr se descreint sceint er scaut par un scrittour lon nom e lor condonað vars l'Universtað ne Houlm.|In 1770 the first real self-describing book was written by an anonymous author and donated to the University of Hulm.
L'universtað a y livr facsimilað alcant sur y quadrennial cos exact largecer com possibr, e l'original, a cost y scavr y nuverrem, es sgardabr nell'edifiç la dell'Andron a Heredtatur.|The university has duplicated the book once every four years in as exact a way as possible, and the original, alongside the most recent copy, may be viewed in their Department of Heredity building.
My sour ignoy vondrous alcot sta y pegl meyon luy teissuð.|My sister kindly overlooked how ugly the hat I knitted her was.
J'oyeu y domn issar set viglour.|I heard she has seven chauffeurs.
Jo n'ay acconnosc aut d'un segr luïcherrem.|I've never met a more ridiculous man.
L'entrcollocq indiglað se cou evolgað.|The unredacted interview got leaked.
L'ig connart me dau ðorn!|That bastard punched me!
Descon luy noc y fraðr vel morir all'outrcaum dy stoir.|Don't tell her the brother dies at the climax of the story.
Romanç a masquira es un spaiðoir de narrað appopulað cos central con parsonaç outrley (ben delit hasmant), tan com tapeçment viglað de character masquað, y bon melle e vellisqment convoluð.|Masquira romance is a genre of stories which typically feature criminal (or crime-fighting) characters, as well as plots driven by hidden identities, high society and complicated schemes.
I surpon y spaiðoir de spionnaç pog tardessem, cos particuler n'ouvr modern poiðant de casc linaç romanial.|It overlaps with the slightly-later spycraft genre, especially in modern works which draw on both literary traditions.
Y nom 'masquira' descen des y trevold d'an 1860 par Ezio Carvallo Tejan de Masquira ou Jalico "Robað de Masq ben Jalicq", stant lað cossirað ayent y spaiðoir tarront.|The name 'masquira' derives from Ezio Carvallo's 1860 trevold Tejan de Masquira ou Jalico "In Either a Mask or a Suit", which is widely considered to have pioneered the genre.
Romanç a kevlar es un souspaiðoir de masquira caglou irrayant a volry opulent, celebr maxime n'Istr Boral dy siecr novoç.|Kevler romance is a subgenre of masquira focused on glamorous thefts, particularly popular in nineteenth-century Borland.
Degnant ig bempart y jout dy spaiðoir son benoçað ne literatur des aubon dell'hour, nos veim y nascenç d'un spaiðoir de romanç a masquira nell'epoc d'Atelier nuverrem.|Although many of the tropes of the genre have been used in literature since time immemorial, we see the birth of a distinct genre of masquira romance in the late Workshop period.
Y sanat all'egrtumnoir tein for dou.|There's only two doctors at the clinic.
Jo soccoðoy y furtiviscour par y frigsment.|I lost my tail in the commotion.
I pegntau toð y lettranç ag reðrpuy meðes.|She even painted all the backtound text.
Laurz Arnoutszen (fl. 1540) sta un sanat dannesc dont y droughanç cas saniscment pestrisceu y mesur de histoir medical n'Europ, oc diçr alcot por ig se pos cas medicin parolar d'un Europ pre Arnoutszen e l'un posc Arnoutszen.|Laurz Arnoutszen (fl. 1540) was a Danish physician whose work in sanitation shaped the course of European medical history, to such an extent that in the context of medicine one can speak of pre-Arnoutszen and post-Arnoutszen Europe.
Interim, histoir sevrar cossy poð y vertað suraðoir par y fanglanç eð issaur d'autr hom pre sy droughanç sepondr.|However, this periodisation can go too far in neglecting others' advancements and successes prior to his work.
An moment quidam posc d'an 1535 i collaborau a sy cosvour Elisa Arnoutszen.|At some point after 1535 he collaborated with his cousin Elisa Arnoutszen.
Sell'heir hamtau sona de folcr cas histoir medical, auteç ayent cos parçal sur y descovart de veunt unicasel.|His son was also pivotal in the history of medicine, being partially responsible for the discovery of single-celled organisms.
Sy gran homily cas lodrigneth medical eð autr issarnç la contenoy y benoç de lembic cadarað com diffrucçon liquid rannuðar.|His great treatise on medical handiwork and other practice included recommending the employment of distilled lembick as liquid disinfectant.
Scey zygom ag vrogs ny doit.|There's a valve in the thin part of the pipe.
Veleð y luam covauclir pre exeunt fair.|Please put the toilet lid down before leaving.
Alcun hom nil nis mettr ag hayennaç çaf.|No-one will bother doing the extra homework.
Y stoir de forç a sougl a sell'inceuçon d'an 1902, posc y nux atomic descovrir—oc a digr, descovrir ig pres toð y moul d'un atom es se situant vars y centr den.|The story of threshold force begins in 1902, with the discovery of the atomic nux—that is, the discovery that almost all of the heft of an atom is located near its centre.
L'oc occorreu all'Atelier a Nÿstad (lor posseïð e gournað nell'un man par theorist soustançal Lohic Courvoiseir de Nÿstad) ny citað cappaçan a Varonøw.|This took place at the Nÿstad Atellier (then privately owned and run by substantial theorist Lohic Courvoisier de Nÿstad) in the Cappatian city of Varonøw.
Y corporal benoçað ny majortað imman de molin a sougl, kildarc, er preu cadarað ag siecr novoç mi ny scir irðonnesc de Killdara (dont vien y nom dy soustanç, tras y parol cambresc kildárc 'de Killdara').|The corporal used in the vast majority of threshold mills, killdark, was first isolated in the mid-nineteenth century in the Irish shire of Killdara (whence, via Welsh kildárc 'from Killdara', the substance's name).
Portingal sta un tarromour cas forç a sougl, interrogment sur sy laboriostað ag dezein 1950 parsount neðan mantenir ig ðe basn par astraphor enajað des y Collujon Drengot.|Portingale was a pioneer of threshold force, funding research into its effectivity in the 1950s in a bid to reduce their dependence on astraphor exported by the Drengot Collusion.
L'er asseyent eð un aujon survolant.|He was sat leafing through a magazine.
Lor luïsceum nos caugtrbal jos y loub.|Then we played football near the shops.
Stou ty sour convoccar dec i's tan ricottabr.|You should invite your sister; she's so funny.
Y Collujon Drengoçan sta un alleyanç-federaç de païs monfeyað n'Europ norðovester.|The Drengot Collusion was a multinational alliance-federacy in northwestern Europe.
Nommað lonc y ci Empir Drengoçan ançan (lou stant nommað lonc y linaç nobr normant ayent bempart de Gaul e d'Albion unfeyað),|Named for the older Drengot Empires (themselves named for the Norman noble family who first united much of Gaul and Albion),
l'oc crescoy des concort divers ny siecr novoç mi vars y possenç principal ny region denir fin a sy sfondranç dramatic d'an 1961.|it grew from various treaties in the mid-nineteenth century into the principal power in the region until its dramatic collapse in 1961.
Y Collujon Drengoçan smargoy parmy y polity francesc nell'epoc dell'Asteller Mondial.|The Drengot Collusion arose among the French polities of the Global Workshop period.
pog asc apres er y Nou Sar Urban (un congerie de citað autonom naðusc oc Londr sovran abrangent, tan com Ausbagn n'Istr Boral)|Shortly thereafter the New Urban Mesh (a collection of somewhat-autonomous cities including independent London, as well as Axbane on Borland)
caut sousunt—ben denuð autour, lonc y nosthubr idiosyncras seyon aut—dy Collujon smargent.|was subsumed by—or took control of, depending on one's personal biases—the nascent Collusion.
Jo sta raussið d'y vec vabian closnautr montar.|I was loath to board the rickety bus.
Torn all'An ne Deganny interman un cainç scroçabr.|New Year's in Deganny is a harrowing experience.
Nossell'appragl phasm n'a ceu alcun grastum.|Our television set is almost completely flat.
Y Fraterntað Jagovin, cos historic tan connuð sou nom dell'Orn a Sagnt Jagm, es un communtað religious y citað Ausbagn hamtant ag rimot souðer n'Istr Boral.|The Jacobin Fraternity, historically also known as the Order of Saint James, is a religious organisation based in the city of Axbane on the south coast of Borland.
Y Fraterntað er instaurað ne Flandr ag siecr deg sou y patronnement d'Amegl de Brug.|The Fraternity was founded in tenth-century Flanders under the patronage of Amelia of Bruges.
Ag siecr onç l'oc er envoluð com conjuraçonnour n'un smout pouvlancer vecin contrell'Emperour Drengoçan Joffrey II eð obligað a enfugr tras mar vars Istr Boral.|In the eleventh century it was implicated in a local popular uprising against Drengot Emperor Geoffry II and forced to flee over the sea to Borland.
La costroyeurn ðe y Monastir Peninsoler ancour Ausbagn surplombant.|There they built the Peninsular Monastery which still overlooks Axbane.
Moneð des y Fraterntað droughau ag Palaç Jagovin ny ci bandlau atorn de Damvað, eç posc lorry compliscenç ag siecr ogtoç nuverrem denent y posson fis por y parolment borallesc.|Funds from the Fraternity contributed to the Jacobin Estates on the outskirts of Damvath, which on their completion in the late eighteenth century became the fixed location of Borland's parliament.
Sceint oy l'orn es reconnuð cos majortaðer por y colluy seyon aut, Yeustman Jaibos, tan com eiðel spanent ny citað posseyent (ig inclus y plaç dell'un parmy y bagn roman antic la).|Today the organisation is known mostly for the guild they own, Jaibos Breweries, as well as for owning significant lands in the city (including the site of one of the ancient Roman bathhouses there).
Jo vil molir an requïçon idoneyessem de my caf d'an posc.|I'll ask my boss for a more convenenient weekend next year.
Zillapr stan sy brag embrostant.|His underpants had buttercups on.
Nos depostau l'eç taflot an bacaget.|We keep these board games in a closet.
Y viol cemtir intermann un jout cyclant ny cont a pouvr borallesc.|The graveyard fiddlers are a recurring motif in the folklore of Borland.
Postulað es ig ðe sein gast a mort sont ovittað con y broit enigmatic e lontan de baðr viol oïð cos particular jos cemtir eð all'hour prell'ort sol.|They are said to be death spirits responsible for the mysterious sound of string instruments in the air heard especially near cemeteries and in the hour before dawn.
Lorry melody son cos usual descrit com mogn e dolorous.|Their melodies are usually described as low-pitched and mournful.
Orruð y viol cemtir sein un costum peculier n'Istr Boral, dec ustol pouvlancer local no son abrangent d'alcun figur parallel cos ovart.|The fiddlers appear to be a tradition peculiar to Borland, as neighbouring folk traditions do not include any obviously analogous figures.
Ðe son ottem reconnuð allors lonc ig ðe forn svoccað ny melodram Al Igne (Ale in Fiamme) par Chiarina Bruno.|They are most known abroad from their inclusion in opera Wings Afire (Ale in Fiamme) by Chiarina Bruno.
Disc l'oyeus y cont dy viol cemtir des sy fraðr, oc ayent abattuð a cost de soldart borallesc a mesur dy Var Teudesc Dovem.|She is said to have heard the tale of the graveyard fiddlers from her brother, who fought alongside Borlish soldiers in the Second German War.
"Hau a toð gent," dis y giðour quaucant.|"Hi, everyone," said the hurried guide.
I dis "Yela!" pre bouð souvr.|He said "Bye!" then hung up.
L'oc darfour quesq es tan quemant.|This purple bathrobe is so comfy.
Jambor d'Avry sta un rey primal n'Avry pog asc apres dy succession dy polity des y principaltað ny siecr derran.|Jambor of Awry was an early king of Awry following the polity's succession from the principality of the previous century.
I le gournau a mesur de spanjon d'influyenç mojaric, entrant n'union monarchic con y ci principaltað auster ne Haliç e Valac, e denent un alley ag Roman malchassian ny souð.|He oversaw significant expansion of Mojaric influence, entering into personal union with the eastern principalities of Halich and Valack, and becoming an ally of the Malchassian Romans to the south.
Y gran Livrer de Sobjan er costroit durant sy regn, stant un gravatoir parmanent d'ouvr temporane.|The great Library of Sobjan was built during his reign, an enduring archive of contemporary works.
L'eç incluyen scrit mathematic des y Caliphað Sengr, eç auvorn ne proces de traducçon a latin.|These included mathematical texts from the Single Caliphate, being translated into Latin in great quantities.
Ci siecr apres, un dy descovan dy Livrer intermaneu cla por y Codex Mysarnos notoir descifrar.|Centuries later, one of the Library's manuscripts was instrumental in decoding the famed Mysarnos Codex.
Jo no's un cougt droccað benoçant posc un dezein.|I haven't used a compact disc in ten years.
Tu scencau y soup n'un bacin veronic.|You poured the soup into a plastic tub.
L'a heu allagherrem an ivan ayent hopr receut.|He looked happier than a kid with new toys.
Y siecr novoç a plaç meg intermane un nazir naðusc cas art parachthon.|The mid-nineteenth century was somewhat of a nadir for parachthon art.
Romanç desmanneça vars y jagat cojanessem de masquira e cont de kiveu, cant resorgenç historic hamtan y scen mondial.|Romance moved on to masquira and herdtale's more mundane settings, while historical revivals populated the world's stages.
Cosogr y pluottanç de spaiðoir ag siecr veint ençau nos a l'incorporaçon volonter veir de mornç parachthon afont de stoir allors, com cont d'amour eð enigma;|With the maturation of genres in the twentieth century we begin to see purposeful melding of parachthon elements in stories of other sorts, like lovetales and ænigmata;
l'oc tan eð y sousunçon de barstant comportant com Futurism ramenaurn parachthony alcheðr jug nell'eutað.|this and the incorporation of related movements like Futurism brought parachthony back into popular art for good.
Y defas de machinaçon er mout ammont par ouvr parachthon, e donc sonc plusour nell'onomatoir orðenjanç modern nommant aun lorrell'orn ec destr.|The progress of technology was often presaged by parachthon works, and so many items of vocabulary for modern contrivances have their origin there.
Com bustr, y 'sar pistol' vien colombant des y fougl dy trevold d'an 1968 'Kenopleus', par Ashford Pasquier.|As an example, the 'pistol mesh' is lifted from the pages of Ashford Pasquier's 1968 novel 'Starsail'.
Jan's acavað a casc batman haval allaçar.|John's managed to get every action figure.
Ant heu ðonc l'ovroy y valigs.|With a wry look he opened the case.
Jo luy hortaminau acceir all'empley.|I urged him to accept the job.
Ny region es y polity a Mascic predominant, oc spanent entr y dou rimot e vars y norð aðief por poðir Mivoc toccar nell'ovest e Taisca toccar nell'aust.|The region is predominated by the polity of Mashick, which stretches from coast to coast and so far north as to border Mivock in the west and Taisha in the east.
Orðenjanç barric plusour dell'epoc d'Atelier jagerrem smargoy des Mendeva Bassem, deut plausibr a reclam addoçmental cas y respanment rapid d'accaç filer (no sceint pog adopçon paravant dy sar a gonfan e lucern por deslocar ny region).|Many barric innovations of the late Workshop period came out of Lower Mendeva, likely due to practical concerns around the rapid spread of wired post (there being little previous adoption of the flag-lamp steeplemesh in the region to displace).
Pre y siecr veintem jagerrem, l'oc region fo denuð enajour diçr de mansc com maus eð ambac.|By the late twentieth century, this region had become major exporters of foods such as mause and amback.
Març larc aun origin ne Mendeva Bassem, ec gles bilrod, scoclet, scadom e tascban abrangent.|Many trade goods originated in Lower Mendeva, including billrod dye, shockle, shadome and tashban.
My gramma sorteu un boist plen de crochet.|My gran brought out a full tin of biscuits.
Nos pretenm ig casc nou muncef ain nux.|We plan to have a hub in each new town.
Te stove un cottegl a ty dois accatar?|Did you need to buy a new phone case?
Ag siecr iniçal posc sell'inceuçon sta y Convey Australier de natur ceu band glorfiað (toð a verb) de batman.|In the first decades of its existence the Convoy Australier was in essence a (quite literally) glorified band of mercenaries.
L'oc aye se pleis auvorn dell'eç mordeth eð y confraðr primer, des y Prinçipaltað de Mystra ny Greç vars y fallout imparyent a Jerusalem.|It was heavily involved in the first crusades and related ventures, from the Principality of Mystra in Greece to the unsuccessful forays in Jerusalem.
L'oc fo cargað con y mission d'y stat novel n'Antioch eð y Havan Simon administrar tost posc lorry concarnç ag siecr doç.|It was appointed to administrate the new states of Antioch and Port Simon soon after their conquests in the twelfth century.
Pap Just emmenau y gournanç d'Antioch eð y Havan Simon des y Convey d'an 1208 com outrcaum d'un calver offirnt entr facçon.|Pope Just revoked the Convoy's rulership of Antioch and Port Simon in 1208 as the culmination of a escalating inter-faction struggle.
Interim, concordað cos general es ig l'oc act erreveu y Convey des un fujon d'eromn tandem (deut ag mescainç porrujonnant dy Mordeth Disceint).|However, it is generally agreed that this act saved the Convoy a great amount of trouble in the long run (given the imminent disaster of the Failed Crusade).
Jo pos parolar coll'autour ou?|May I speak to the owner?
Jo's stuðant vars theorist soustançal denir.|I'm studying to be a materials scientist.
Lon ongit no's un collujon d'Ubictað unanim postular.|It is nonsensical to say there is a united Ubiquity bloc.
Cossy sceint, frugt sta conservað par meyan lorry matier sandrinal eliminant (com bustr, par boglir ben benoç de vas ne cuivr) e donc moðnaut sofren de scurvog toð cas, ig colluy indugnt vars plu frugt bacagettar enter.|Thus, fruit would be preserved in ways which removed their sandrine content (for example, boiling or use of copper vessels) and sailors would suffer scurvy anyway, leading guilds to abandon stocking fruits altogether.
Un grap theoretic cos vray nole avenir pre siecr settoç, candon sceye descovart par bonaventur ig laprot guy poun doutr scurvog accarr (human e guy son soltumnesc parmy l'œcumen animal cas noc poðir sandrin detaxionnar cos autonom des çucar).|Truly theoretic understanding would not come until the seventeenth century, when it was discovered by chance that the guy-rabbit can also develop scurvy (humans and guys are rare among animals in not creating sandrine in our bodies from sugar).
L'oc parmettoy experienç fort scrutiniosessem eð expediðessem sur guy, por y bon ploghanç de frugt e leum discernir par effectualtað cas scurvog coïr.|This allowed for much more rigorous and time-efficient testing on guys, to determine what preparations of fruits and vegetables were effective at preventing scurvy.
All'yenç dy siecr ogtoç sta l'issar usual denuð saf a limmon sdroyar diluïð com lembic starc durant veyaç marin lonc.|By the 1700s it had become common practice to stock lemon juice diluted with strong alcohol on long sea voyages.
Icon alcot a tu fait coll'oc celaminour?|How many photos have you taken with this camera?
Y compleis spartessem courn gaðan tars.|The better contestants won decidedly.
Gevou bro, tu's l'oc duel renent un pog arrhenosarc.|Heads up dude, you're making this duel a bit homoerotic.
Durant l'oc epoc sceyen y stabliscment d'alleyanç-federaç plusour volent tandem y traitment mondial tras y siecr veintem, tal com y Collujon Drengoçan n'Europ norðovester (y crescenç den closisceu d'an 1894 posc l'accession d'Istr Boral).|This period sees the establishment of several alliance-federacies that would go on to define the geopolitics of the twentieth century, such as the Drengot Collusion in north-western Europe (whose expansion concluded in 1894 with the accession of Borland).
Y parceuçon dell'epoc Bel-Jou com un asc ant spionnaç opulent e pisment conjuraçonal cas politic sou teneur covart no's cos enter dignað—se poð comparaçon fair entr y parceuçon pouvlancer (par meyan de livr e lasc) dell'affer Desarden d'an 1887 un ambasctour Londresc eð y rey a Naccon Day contr y realtað cojannessem.|The perception of the Good Game period as a time of glamorous espionage and political machinations behind closed doors is not entirely deserved—compare the popular perception (via books and film) of the 1887 Desarden affair involving a London ambassador and the king of Nackon Day with the tawdrier reality.
Nentamen, l'oc epoc a se reitfeyað com jagat celebr por romanç a spionnaç eð a masquira.|Nevertheless, the period has cemented itself as a popular setting for spycraft and masquira stories.
Jo sceu y moment veir de ty plouç souvr.|I caught the moment you dropped the act.
I me dau ðorn tranq ag massour.|She punched me right in the jaw.
J'asseye n'oc hour fin a tandem alandau my convey.|I sat for a bit until my train came at last.
Innascment primal vars Santrafeu abrangen stemn a coval e hopr metal, ec vençað com troc contr pelur e vigt insuet.|Early imports into Santrafew included horse stocks and metal tools, traded in exchange for furs and new foodstuffs.
D'an 1590 Derek Nassow, y heriter imminent por y Ducað a Avosc ne Willemy, enfugheu tras mar vars Santrafeu deut a raçon inconnuð.|In 1590 Derek Nassow, the heir apparent to the Duchy d'Avosche in Willemy, fled overseas to Santrafew for unclear reasons.
L'oc menau vars un scandal incendier cort soccoðent tras Europ ovester e cos particuler l'oç un de Rey David a Franç.|This led to an incendiary scandal that rocked courts across Western Europe and especially that of King David of France.
Y Travodað Becouin d'an 1621 motivau y comport cas ley entr Santrafeu eð y gent Mendevan ny region fin a pieç generaçon apres.|The 1621 Becouin Treaty outlined the legal relationship of Santrafew to the Mendevan peoples of the region for some generations.
Ne souc dy Gazou Breðonnesc a Santrafeu, yon rumorað er ig y Mastoisèt cos propr soloirn droug entarn, y travodað er broyað par meyan dy coyenç marcer effectuað de Bourgmer Alexandre fi Marco tan con sell'exiglment dy Mastoisèt a verb (eð autr tribu Mendevan a gest).|Following the British Sack of Santrafew, in which the Mastoisèt in particular were alleged to have collaborated, the treaty was broken by Mayor Alexandre fi Marco's embargo and ten-league exile of the Mastoisèt in particular (and other Mendevan groups in practice).
Intermane pegntur d'un joun doncel eð un guy.|It was a painting of a young girl and a guinea pig.
Cayen orðenjanç theoretic plusour descovart par bonaventur.|Many scientific inventions were discovered by chance.
A gest, aucel son progenies jug dez dragon.|In fact, birds are descended from dinosaurs.
Ny salon caye zoum dy murmuranç nievrous d'un murðon a collocq, parfis atras con bau sporadic d'hom ricottant.|The salon hummed with the indistinct murmur of myriad conversations, punctuated by occasional barks of laughter.
Matthias eye sarpentin entr haçot de jolleyour, y hal parcorrent a gas doutr plumaç remeyaçant e caliç ne crystal.|Matthias weaved between knots of revellers, his eyes scanning the room over bobbing plumes and crystal flutes.
Bojay minç vacillan ne candellabr adornað, y tapeçment eð y paið trave bagnant con splendiscment quemant.|Tapers flickered in ornate candelabras, casting a warm glow over the wall-hangings and the parquet floors.
Sur un los ny cogn jagerrem, un party a raspour luyen ne coutrant un xivol nervous cant per trasen y hal ne voltiscent, lorry cottegl e mantel faint souvolar capaç.|On a dais at the far end, a coterie of string players sawed through a sprightly xivola as couples whirled around the room, their skirts and capes sweeping widely.
Matthias cave parcevet de visaç seyon connuð; y nas aquilin all'ambasctour Cantesc, y sourey polið a Domn Gassola, un bevey diamantin relugnt seyon vis nuverrem sur y col ag Duches a Astorga.|Matthias caught glimpses of familiar faces; the Kentish ambassador's aquiline nose, Lady Gassola's polished smile, a sparkling diamond parure he'd last seen adorning the Duchess of Astorga.
My paðr es collocquant con y gournour imminent.|My father is interviewing the governor-elect.
Ðe son se rajognent sou teneur covart pieç semman.|They have been meeting in secret for a few weeks.
Y pascman abrange zaquesc e desc assovent y dou.|The eatery had both snacks and full meals.
Preðauc vos seyað feliç aðief a un orin ny rimot Masrecq broucar|Unless you have the good fortune to hail from the Masreck coast
(degnant par boc y staddenzan Cappaçan ain un kes cosvour, la fait quippe des laið a vacq),|(although I hear the Cappatian staddenzen have a similar cheese, there made of course with cow's milk),
vos stoura se contentar an kes Cypriot quidam conservað sou salmoir oc, ja pos ragostant cos immachiabr nell'oc mistur pouvler,|you will need to content yourself to brine-stored Cypriot cheese which, while perfectly appetising in this traditional mélange,
noc incaint vars y repasc deliçous attegndr meyon pris a cost y mar posc un jorn passað ny ruin a Knossos.|is unlikely to match the exquisite meal I took by the sea after a day spent among the ruins of Knossos.
Se pos reclamar ig jo no fos cos forçað for souvolant ne souc de grantað, emmenað lonc y mesur par y gra d'asc reðr mey;|One might object that I must simply have been swept up in grandeur, carried along by the weight of aeons behind me;
de my sgart jo vil aglon y cociner reconnoscr.|for my part I am inclined to credit the chef.
J'yemoy scið aïr kes raspað demay sad.|I realised I'd grated far too much cheese.
Nos erau y fabr parcorrent set hour.|We'd been rehearsing for seven hours.
Y rimband ag fruyour souvolaurn apar.|The dancer's ribbons swept through the air.
Soumoin jaint vars Bensaíd ne L'Appragl de Communeyaçon, argument fair sur y gimmolt mondial d'an 1677 por y trasson de Maucr parcevir com bustr primal de collaboraçon theoretic tars tarm.|With reference to Bensaíd's The Communication Toolset, discuss the 1677 global effort to observe the transit of Mercury as an early example of international scientific collaboration.
Racont fair ou dy veyaç dell'astronom Dannesc Gudmund e Rebecca Scradder ag cort Seldivan, ben dy vandy politic all'Observatoir a Trapoles sou Malik Lisan Al-Mostansir.|Chronicle either the voyage of Danes Gudmund and Rebecca Scradder to the Seldivan court, or the political difficulties at the Observatory at Trapoles under Malik Lisan Al-Mostansir.
Illustrar cos mathematic ig gent poðen con y method a tre pognt y lontað ag sol augrimar par meyan de lorry regest de trasson combinað.|Illustrate mathematically how the threepoint method allowed people to calculate the solar distance using their combined transit records.
Scey nis alcot ag defait de gournanç d'hour tranq aðief por ig no sceus un gimmolt parallel durant y trasson Viendran ny dezein 1630?|Was it a lack of sufficiently-accurate timekeeping that prevented such an effort during the Venusian transits of the 1630s?
Sy xivol aye tug aglon de skisteç.|He waltzed with more passion than grace.
Ðe son y trave costroint toð y jorn.|They've been doing the jigsaw all day.
Nos veleu soumoin jair a nossy conemour.|We'd like to shout out our patrons.
Y lonctum par lau de Japetos III, y novel conjogntur Atlantic oy depos des Morrac vars Ambrosia eð ayent sy preu boðanç augtað je Maucr derran.|The length in leagues of Japetos III, the new Atlantic link laid down between Morrack and Ambrosia which conveyed its first messages this last Wednesday.
Vellisquað cos original pall'eç administraçon a catr man d'an 1943, l'accommission dene demorað veg monfeyað deut ag confluyenç de hey cas bors e, lon digr, y sounç dy var.|Originally conceived by the two administrations in concert in 1943, the endeavour was delayed several times due both to budgetary concerns and, of course, the outbreak of war.
Y snar conjogn y citað de Gadir ag floy Soux e Paratzon ne Brasil auster.|The cable connects the cities of Gadire on the river Soux and Paratzon in eastern Brasil.
L'enombr de vouð dessur dell'opposson ny cambr Yansief yon y soumission dy clou Zachet por interrogment sull'effectualtað de molin a forç sougl se cof yer eligt, ne souc d'un veðrvent imprefait cas y jure suajonnant dy Minister a Ðar.|The number of votes by which the Mortar coalition's proposal to fund effectivity research into threshold force mills passed in the Yansieve chamber yesterday, after a surprising volte-face from the Ministry for Farming advisory board.
Partejan aun (ða lorry nosthubr sey visant vars y Collujon ben contrig) caglou irrayað cos divers sull'eç advantaç cohernt a men basant a astraphor Drengoçan e sull'occasion de l'Andron a Alchemy ne Lisbon extollir com mojol ny doujug mondial.|Proponents have (depending on their sympathies or lack thereof regarding the Collusion) pointed variously to the benefits of relying less on Drengot astraphor and of elevating Lisbon's Faculty of Alchemy to a hub on the world stage.
Jo passau y trasson nell'exedr a quarvol.|I spent the layover in the airport lounge.
L'exedr n'a alcun vivirc por asseïr.|The waiting room has nowhere to sit.
Cay l'oc convey visað ag quarvol?|Is this the train to the airport?
Zaf er denuð quïscour dec apar l'aye l'occajon a foyaçar eð a gent aïðar veg temporane.|Zaf had become a firefighter because it let him show off and help people at the same time.
L'oc no sta bogr autrað; sull'oc, toð cas, aye i jamay y vertað dis.|That hadn't changed; that, at least, he had been truthful about.
I cof ancour l'ig ðougl meðes des y toxen oïr, des y vagn viglar con sy balis briglant e sy vagiscour hurlant, des port caugtrant deur lorry sougl—souvanç y gahaðasterrem de gent feirn sy cour battr.|He still got the same rush from hearing the alarm, from driving the engine with its brilliant lights and screaming noisemakers, from kicking in doors—people's worst days made him feel alive.
L'ec sceusn solcið inquillir n'un hom incaindessem vars cuidanç de sey.|Someone more prone to self-reflection might have felt qualms about that.
A sgart calscon, y squadron encontraurn noc veram mort tal mout.|In any case, the crew didn't actually see deaths that often.
Nentamen, incoïbr sta cos sporadic ern y grabattour haft an pognt remot allors ny citað, ben ig un armanç cojan surcou un belem mortal.|Nevertheless, it was inevitable that sometimes the stretcher-bearers were occupied halfway across the city, or that a routine call turned deadly.
L'a un sgart mallovicher de ðar.|He's very naïve about farmwork.
Y torvegl indugs ec mesuranç suprem de veðrvent tras istr.|The storm led to record windspeed measurements nationwide.
Ðe aun cascun dou clou a vastel ja paut.|They've eaten two pieces of cake each.
Y Nou Sar Urban intermane un alleyanç de citað autonom naðusc n'Europ norðovester durant y siecr novoç.|The New Urban Mesh was an alliance of somewhat autonomous cities in Northwest Europe in the nineteenth century.
Parmy sy sodal stan Londr, Conster, Ausbagn, Pentros, Amstel, Anvers e Gant.|Among its members were London, Conster, Axbane, Pentrose, Amstel, Anvers and Gant.
Y Sar smargoy cos contemporane e parallel a apprestanç politic comportant allors, tal com y Citað Floyan lonc y Danau.|The Mesh emerged contemporaneously with similar political structures elsewhere, such as the Riverine Cities along the Danaw.
Plusour parmy y citað ag Sar stan cos simoltane part de polity ja sceint (com bustr, Ausbagn e Pentros no stan jamay sovran a verb deur Istr Boral).|Several of the Mesh's cities were simultaneously part of pre-existing polities (for example, Axbane and Pentrose were never legally independent from Borland).
L'oc ort de tal federaç de stat citaðer se caf ascreut all'aðoinç pouvlancer eð y crescenç de citað rapid tras l'approism dell'epoc all'Atelier Mondial.|This rise of such federacies of city-states has been attributed to the rapid population growth and expansion of cities in the run-up to the Global Workshop period.
Y Sar cos particuler sta ag rostr de machinaçon cas vascel costroinç, eð i poðe un ronç remarcabr cavir dy recoglenç de carbon mondial.|The Mesh in particular was at the forefront of shipbuilding technology, and had access to an appreciable fraction of the world's coal production.
J'osc sy cigl novel; i's mallovicher sad demay.|I hate her new girlfriend; she's far too chipper.
J'addoceu my sour d'ig j'er grabattour parsiscent.|I told my sister I was training to be a paramedic.
Jo's cuidant cos nuvr a my dois extollir.|I've been meaning to upgrade my phone.
Posc un liesc com citað seconder n'Albion, Londr redenoy alcheðr y cafloy imperial ny region durant y Scon Tetrarchy ne sona d'un part dy Preu Empir Drengoçan.|After time as a secondary city in Albion, London became the imperial capital of the region once more during the Second Tetrarchy as part of the First Drengot Empire.
Y Preu Ðurnç a Londr fis loy d'an 1290; ag mendrem 400 hom ern occis deut ag catastroph d'un semman cohernt.|The First Burning of London took place in 1290; at least 400 people were killed in the ensuing week-long disaster.
L'oc no sta for un parmy conflagraçon plusour ny preu demy dy scon millenner, bempart dec y citað se cou cos saçonner concas des y norð ben y souð.|This was one of several conflagrations in the first half of the second millennium, many due to the city being perennially conquered from the north or south.
Posc l'eç Rix Democratic a plaç meg ny siecr ogtoç yemoy Londr cos final un autonomy durabr deur sy païs vecin d'an 1749 sou Quen Margaret, poðent sy caðen ancestral ligar ag linaç reyal de Marclont e Cant y dou.|The Democratic Wars of the mid-eighteenth century saw London finally gain lasting independence from its neighbours in 1748 under Queen Margaret, who could trace her ancestry to the royal families of both Markland and Kent.
L'offiç de Segr Bourgmer remane possent cos politic aðief por hast pareïr coll'oç dy nou monarch, interim.|The office of Lord Mayor remained politically powerful enough to rival that of the new monarch, however.
Y rostr a my creðon es coroccað.|The tip of my pencil has snapped.
Nos stoun balis sobottal luicessem.|We need stronger radio transmitters.
Y sounç de var interromoy eç accommission corrogaçonal.|War breaking out interrupted those infrastructure projects.
Durant y Scon Tetrarchy loy fignt ny scon millenner primal, Libya (y nom temporane Ifricia dignant) sta un admiraltað majour ny Caliphað Sengr, regnað de Tunis.|During the Second Tetrarchy of the early second millennium, Libya (under the name Ifricia) was an important admiralty of the Single Caliphate, ruled from Tunis.
Tandic prepondranç imperial n'Europ e n'Afric norðer inceveu sy dissoluçon, tan cossy y Caliphað Sengr; un admiraltað autonom ne Libya er depos d'an 1237 (a veg ceu temporane coll'admiraltað Morrou nell'ovest).|As imperial hegemony in Europe and northern Africa began to fall apart, so did the Single Caliphate; an independent admiralty in Libya was declared in 1237 (at roughly the same time as the Morrove admiralty to the west).
Noc obstroint ig y flottisc Libyan n'er ja commarçant cos direct ag Novomond ny siecr seç, moðnaut des y region stan frequent armað par y flottisc marcander de Morrac e (cos particuler) de Provenç.|Although Libya's navy was not yet trading directly with the Novomund in the sixteenth century, seamen from the region were commonly employed in the merchant fleets of Morrack and (especially) of Provence.
Ny siecr settoç primal, y gonfan de Libya abrange dou quarrel neir, un blanc eð un oransc.|In the early seventeenth century, the banner of Libya comprised two black fields, one white and one orange.
Noc imprefait es ig tell'heir denoy sleut.|I'm not surprised your son's a politician.
J'aye spien ig l'oç madarc no fos a squid.|I hoped that that cop wasn't on the take.
Le scey tojorn quondant con un çod rubic.|She's always hanging out with sporty friends.
Dec orruð i carra noc un respos contr sy convoc a pan rompr accougl, e dec i sera attent reunt ag garnçon toð cas, Omar quauc vars y donjon.|Since it seems his invitation to eat together will not be accepted, and since he is expected back at the garrison anyway, Omar hurries to the tower.
Ac son y soldart nuvr ðorant, sur lorrell'assignment aglon de ny masquet cosogr y païsan, deut ag besogn ig ðe noun se situar lontan demay dy gran port condon y toxen incoïbr sorc por avartr ig y preu rostr Roman son detectað.|The soldiers have been praying here, at their posts rather than in the mosque with the people, because they cannot be caught too far from the gates when the inevitable alarm goes up that the first Roman vanguards have been spotted.
Lonc y commant dy gournour, band aun toð y poið enverimmað ben coyençað, eç arbr tos, eð y feu tars de tout calscon benoçabr com vitagl e vegr.|By order of the governor, men have poisoned or blocked all the wells, cut down trees, and scourged the land of anything that could be used for provisions and fodder.
Y barbarin son dolent sou y caldour bruslant, ma ðe son avançant nentamen.|The barbarians are suffering in the scorching heat, but they advance nonetheless.
Jo luy dau un croun neðan i surcous ne fousc arð.|I gave him some cash so he wouldn't be flat broke.
Com soð vos tout dijarnt a mesur dell'ec asc inoïð?|How are you faring in these unprecedented times?
Con ðigl eu nos y dou port rent frasterrem.|We've reinforced both doors with planks.
Y Var Teudesc Dovem (1815–23) sta un rix y condensaðessem n'eiðel Teudesc ma pres toð y polity n'Europ pleitent.|The Second German War (1815–23) was a conflict centred on German lands but involving almost all the polities of Europe.
L'interman y finisc lonc ustol dy Paç Lonc.|It marks the conventional end of the Long Peace.
L'oc var es cossirað un part dell'occorrenç mondial dy Rix a Reacçon, ig abrangent de conflict desjognt cas traitment ma contemporane tras y mont.|This war is considered part of the global phenomenon of Reaction War, which includes politically unrelated but contemporaneous conflicts around the world.
Degnant ig Vascony acavaus cos iniçal a noc denir jannestað ny conflict, alcant ig sell'envou ne Mendeva e nell'Aust aurn se caut periglað, rey de lor Hernand IV n'aye l'ouçon sauf var souvr contr y Concert Norðer e sociant con y Convey.|Although Vascony at first managed not to become embroiled in the conflict, once its interests in Mendeva and the East were threatened, then-king Hernand IV had no choice but to declare against the Northern Concert and in favour of the Convoy.
Istr Boral se pleitoy ny var, cossy sceint soldart Borallesc present a cost batman Bavarn e Furlan ag catastroph cas mal gournment dy Battagl a Houlm d'an 1821.|Borland participated in the war, with Borlish soldiers present alongside Bavarn and Furlain fighters at the disastrously mismanaged Battle of Hulm in 1821.
L'aye min baðaspat de my vestið vabian closnautr.|He looked nonplussed at my bedraggled appearance.
Orruð ig scerra alcheðr un parolment scaug.|It seems there'll be another hung parliament.
Y baðrment trassonnau an bercellot desbiacq.|The ensemble shifted to a swung ballad.
Mell'heir es cogntið de liesc recorrent veg ancour.|My son’s stuck in a time loop again.
I crey jo saif noc, lon digr.|He thinks I don’t know, of course.
I n'a jamay me descont ig ly cay l'oc (ben ig i poð l'oc fair, parcanç; jo no's scur de calun).|He’s never told me that this happens to him (or that he can do this, possibly; I’m not sure which it is).
Plausibr es ig jo's un mal maðr, ða jo n'ay me provað a l'ig confeyanç dignar.|Maybe I’m a bad mother, if I haven’t proven myself worthy of that trust.
Ma no scein for tan veg yon se poð y heir sgardar sy jorn passant a monnocquant ant impatienç infruniscent, reagent de tout teyon dis cos rapid demay just com picq eð alcun goppiet mostrant ag cainç y goppietandessem meðes, e soulor descenent souscen desmecchiattað ma rajounað eð ant un exuberanç novel a cost un incainç vars emboscment souvar dy cos y previsiblessem meðes, fin a tu discern y ratiocinaçon evident.|But there are only so many times that you can watch your son trudge through a day with bored impatience, anticipating everything you say just a little too quickly and showing no surprise to even the most surprising event, and then come downstairs the next day disoriented but rejuvenated and with a new zest for life and a tendency to get blindsided by even the most predictable things, before you make the obvious connection.
Ðe ayen heu lastumnesc, com ig ðe n'ayen for pog dormið.|They looked haggard, as though they hadn't slept much.
Surcay nos condoceu an çoir parey.|It turns out we go to the same gym.
Fig a pounçar e faç mey garaf poll'oc gat!|Stop flirting and help me with this barrier!
Plausibr, val Levy sey vexaðessem.|Probably, Levy should be more upset.
Plausibr es ig l'ay scoc jug.|Probably he is still in shock.
Bon ou?|Right?
I met sgart tras y fenestr ag zovay (lodrigneðer i no's un zovay, for un pavr dignant Corry ayent offrið a le viglar ag quarvol, dec alcun roç no's commarçant all'oc mert de Hamblottaç Lau pre Yonoscon, Taisha) eð i surveil got d'aug cors s'accommettent a bas sur y veðr, dec lon digr cay ploy, eð i doul all'ig mal genoil cos sad.|He looks out of his taxi window (it's not technically a taxi, just some guy named Corry who offered him a ride to the airport, because cabs don't operate in fucking Tinyville, Bumfuck Middle-Of-Nowhere, Taisha) and tracks water droplets racing each other down the glass, because of course it's raining, and his bad knee is killing him.
Levy fay snifr e frot y man sur ogl e soulor i sort sy dois e reserf un masctig por vol reunt a Santrafeu, broncant posc catr cent e veint seg tron se caun portað deur sy cont tesoral.|Levy sniffs and rubs at his eyes and then pulls out his phone and books a ticket back to Santrafew, wincing as four hundred and twenty-six trone are deducted from his bank account.
Jo fey paupieðr an spaiðoir arveiðrous con hast.|I hurriedly opened a random drawer.
Nos desveyaum d'un ðorof a cogmaðer clamant.|We dodged a gaggle of noisy tourists.
I tirau un largeç a haçot imprefait des sy cofrsac.|He pulled surprisingly many things from his backpack.
Entrou 5 (trent minut) Argument fair ou ne promoçon ben n'opposson cas dou calscon parmy l'ec thes.|Question 5 (thirty minutes) Argue either in favour of or in opposition to any two of the following theses.
(i) Y parol Anglesc 'silver' a un origin incertan—parol referent all'oç matier son accart des un lengaç vars un autr tras millenner par meyan de sar commarcer lað.|(i) The word 'silver' is of uncertain origin—words referring to the substance have been borrowed between languages for millennia via extensive trade networks.
L'origin y plausiblessem dell'oc parol (v. sudrabs ne Lithovan, 'asrvae ne Hausan, zirar ne Vasq) com parol trocher es 𒀫𒁍𒌝 (surpum) n'Acadian ataval.|The most likely origin of the word (cf. Lithowan sudrabs, Hausan 'asrvae, Vask zirar) as a trade-word is in ancient Acadian 𒀫𒁍𒌝 (surpum).
(ii) Y benoç de run Sinnesc lonc son, un issar por nom certan e por autr parol d'origin foran des antictað e tesmognað ne polity veçinant (v. lettranç maniocan primal) des y sieçr settem N, caf reconnoscenç ne Cathay sou y regn Kitannesc deut a gimmolt volonter por y polity sevrar deur sell'eç veçin souðer.|(ii) Usage of Sinic runes soundwise, a practice in certain names and other words of foreign origin since antiquity and seen in neighbouring polities (cf. early maniocan script) from the seventh century N, gains currency in Cathay during Kitan rule due to purposeful efforts to sunder the polity from their southern neighbours.
L'indrec de my sour es se trovant entr hugt e gavisc.|My sister's charity is going from strength to strength.
Nossy foyail es fis e scein lau pre yonoscon.|We're out of petrol in the middle of nowhere.
Tal inquit no son dignant de mell'yam.|Such words are unworthy of my uncle.
Y Colluy dy Nou Mont nommað cos auspecer sta corporalleyað par Malic Mounir al-Hamdawi d'an 1643, e pres pront la nonçamen dell'Abanc Novomondin fos yent a cort ern vascel dy Colluy accaçað vars l'ovest.|The prophetically-named New World Company was established by Malik Munir al-Hamdawi in 1463, and almost as soon as news of the Novomundine Landfall had reached court were ships of the Company sent westward.
Cay l'oc flottisc ayent communeyanç fait con y gent dell'Arcabil, tan com y dou empir Mascic e Tavancin.|It was this fleet which made contact with the peoples of the Arcabil, as well as the Mashick and Tavancine empires.
Vascel Morrac stan y primer a y mont circonnavigar, stant parvenuð ag Gran Rajognt Borunesc d'an 1519 via Cappatia.|Morrack ships were the first to circumnavigate the world, having reached the Great Borunesk Meeting of 1519 via Cappatia.
Souspeut es ig y mort dell'Emperour Tavancin Carivasary d'an 1660 fo veraçter un assassinat accommis lonc commant Morrac, cos cuidað por y cæros ovrir d'un commarç cas argent profitandessem des Tavancy.|The death of Tavancine Emperor Cariwasary in 1660 is suspected to have been an assassination carried out on Morrack orders, purportedly to allow for more profitable trade in silver from Tavancy.
J'azia ne spien ig un hom interromois my laur d'asn.|I stood, hoping someone would interrupt the tedium.
Y victoir dell'ig sleut sta un ðorn de hanc.|That candidate winning came out of nowhere.
J'acatau dou quignou de nossy govondry.|I bought two pastries from our canteen.
Martin scoutau y baðrment durant hour monfeyað e fo mesteyað n'yembr scið posc i lançau ogl a sell'orlosc a caðen ig for veint minut n'ern laundað.|Martin listened to the ensemble for several hours and was disappointed to discover when he glanced at his watch that only twenty minutes had passed.
Cos ouveg i recuidau ig Jacq n'aye besogn aut de sy presenç la bogr; l'ec fardig a torriot dont Martin aye sy parcorrenç oïð ig crevoscr ayen son nervous e meðes foyaçant.|Sullenly he reflected that James hadn't needed him in attendance at all; the bassoon solos Martin had heard him rehearsing last night sounded confident and even virtuosic.
Manifest tan sta ig lorry caf maldigt au l'orn enter recompos.|It was also apparent that the accursed leader had rearranged the programme.
Y cæros de Jacq caint zaressem vole avenir ag liesc outr dy crevoscr, e donc Martin poðe noc meðes sortir ortellent ag tarnot dy loy ny hiat.|James's biggest moment would come right at the end of the evening, so Martin couldn't even sneak out to the venue's bar at the interval.
Intermane un ovartur des l'ig melodram dont l'au se caut emmenað an scenanç lascer e soulor invectivað avars durant dou hour.|It was an overture from that opera he'd been dragged to a film staging of and subsequently ranted at about for two hours.
Sceyen hombeul ant cinq pie entarn, i creye—pu veram i n'aye alcun nis prestað la.|There were monsters with five feet in it, he thought—although he really hadn't been paying attention.
Nos s'yettaum por scap fair dell'eç scobr.|We sprinted away from the explosions.
Y nastr a my sac son flois demay.|My bag's straps are too loose.
Nos eum enfugr pront la nos fom soccos destr.|We had to run as soon as we were rumbled.
Ne souc dy ruin dy Lombardesc norðer n'Italy, y linaç regnant enfugheurn vars l'Empir e sceurn autortað remarcabr allaçar la.|Following the fall of the northern Lombards in Italy, the ruling family fled to the Empire and managed to obtain appreciable clout there.
Pieç sodal se courn lorry ascreuçon com agathin por y them ovester nell'Empir, eð y tesmogn scaut par eç autr intermann l'inquit historic y confiablessem cas occorrenç particuler durant y scompigl dy Secession German ny siecr treç.|Some members were appointed to administer the Empire's western themes, and the written accounts of others are history's strongest sources for certain events during the turmoil of the German Secession in the thirteenth century.
Stant dissoluð n'un form vabian closnautr naðusc, a mesur dy siecr catorç venoirn recostroinç effus dy cathedral Sant Sophia tan com spanjon dy quaðeglad, dirigið pall'architect Borgond Nicolà s'Avignon.|Having fallen into somewhat of a state of disrepair, the fourteenth century saw extensive reconstruction of Saint Sophia's cathedral along with expansion of the complex, headed by Burgund architect Nicolà s'Avignon.
Deut all'oc es ig s'Avignon dign parveg e cos joculant y dobanç de "l'architect dy ruin dell'Empir", la sceint y cainç tragic volent se produgr afont dy Sant Sophia aval de tre cent annað.|It is for this reason that s'Avignon is sometimes jocularly referred to as the "architect of the Empire's demise", given the tragic events that would take place within Saint Sophia's three hundred years later.
Sell'osceyan vil y cæros nos ovrir de lembic gostar.|Her birthday will give us the chance to try alcohol.
Jo vole pogntar apar ma jo broncau.|I meant to flirt but I chickened out.
No stou bogr snuvr fair dell'oç cæros.|The opportunity's nothing to sniff at.
L'aer bisan de harvest feya mornç ag gien d'Evangelin cant i quaucau par Rout San Margaret, con sy mantel raffleyant dereðr.|The crisp autumn air nipped at Evangeline's cheeks as she hurried down St Margaret's Lane, her cloak billowing behind her.
Cayen l'yeul a Londr un aucoum vivaç des y commovenç de marcant e carrot, eð y fler de castagn stant attost ðolen des y vagn d'un vençour proism.|The streets of London were alive with the bustle of merchants and carriages, and the scent of roasting chestnuts wafted from a nearby vendor's cart.
I clignau y picq pachet fassað ne papir broun contr sy peitrin, ogl lançant la por garantir ig l'oc remaneus fast.|She clutched the small parcel wrapped in brown paper to her chest, glancing at it to ensure it remained secure.
Cant l'approisma y torn vars Rout Hawthorn oc menant vars y livrer de Cavendish, un figur smargoy des vogt dy foscur.|As she approached the turn onto Hawthorn Street that led to Cavendish's bookshop, a figure emerged from the shadows.
Y domn sta cort naðusc eð i porta un curtel de bilrod plen, con sy visaç vellað par un capel nell'eutað e lað d'orlaç.|The woman was rather short and wore a dress of rich billrod, her face obscured by a fashionable wide-brimmed hat.
Jo save l'oc caum contene un fardig d'aloud.|I knew this piece contained a lute solo.
Nos feim un baugl lau pre yonoscon.|We camped in the middle of nowhere.
Y taflot nos souvolau un nievr d'increiltað atorn.|The game sowed seeds of mistrust among us.
All'hour dy Tourf, y Collujon sta gournað par un administraçon stanne sou Romney Darchild.|At the time of the Furore, the Collusion was being administered by a tinplate government under Romney Darchild.
Sceye parmy toð y scandal dy Tourf y descujon dy traitment furtif accommis par y Majon Roug noncupað (y nom commun por y Minister a Moustr dy Collujon) situað a Roun.|One of the scandals of the Furore was the revelation of the clandestine activities undertaken by the Red House (the popular name of the Collusion's Ministry for Information) in Roun.
L'ec gest, enombrað ny Brevier de Darchild, surcourn un kirt ag madou, cos primer l'administraçon actual dessoclant eð apres cos surrun y Collujon enter.|These activities, enumerated in the Darchild memorandum, lit the fuse, first bringing down the current administration and shortly thereafter the entire Collusion.
Un rebondisc dy sfondranç dy Collujon Drengoçan sta l'effectuanç dy reform Cantuesc cas ostracon, ec volen a lorry mesur sarvir com model ny polity plusour tras y mont.|One effect of the collapse of the Drengot Collusion was the implementation of the Kentish ostracon reforms, which would go on to be used as a model in several polities across the globe.
Dig mey; tu va noc a y los me çaveyar.|Tell me; you don't have to sugarcoat it.
Jo trouvau nien benoçabr entr y supellex dy collocquour.|I found nothing useful in the journalist's paraphernalia.
Cay rix un kirt ag madou por defas machinaçonal.|War is a catalyst of technological development.
Y port dy cahut closisceu ne çottant e Jacq plombettau sur y hamac criscant, las de sy post quiðeyant.|The cabin door slammed shut and Jake flopped onto the creaky bunk, exhausted from his gruelling shift.
Y puð ojabr dell'effum fæx de ronç insinua toð sy cambr sarrað.|The horrible stench of diesel exhaust permeated his cramped quarters.
De truc l'accaçau sy cofrsac ragottiscent ny gaheç, dont y govon roglfeyað sonaurn de lorry vagiscment famigler.|He shoved his weathered backpack into the locker, whose rusty hinges made their familiar screech.
A starn, l'eç ont inexorabr contonen y tors dy vascel e menan jug sy cogtaçon a lorrell'istranç maritim.|Outside, the relentless waves battered the ship's hull, a constant reminder of their isolation at sea.
No sceye magn solaç deur y caldour soumargent cant tossottau l'appragl d'aeraçon antic.|There was little relief from the oppressive heat as the ancient ventilation system wheezed.
Durant ig l'allonga, sy front moglað de suour, Jacq recuida ant un benaulaçon tart cos inutr all'eç meis gelað seyon passað sur un javigour ny Mar Norðer.|As he lay there, sweat beading on his brow, Jake thought back with too-late appreciation to the icy months he'd spent on a North Sea fishing trawler.
I laundau cant i descene des y carrot.|He tripped as he got out of the carriage.
Me stove pieç parol bisan dar a my fraðr.|I had to tell my brother some hard truths.
J'yeme noc scið ig l'aye un majon de livr tal effus.|I didn't realise her library was so extensive.
Catrin de Cornou (m. 1233) sta un parson influyent n'Istr Boral durant l'Empir Mitað-Asc.|Catrin of Kernow (d. 1233) was an influential figure in Borland during the Medieval Imperia.
Catrin de Cornou sta y sour antir de Rey Alan VI de Magn Dorogn, oç y Rallignment de Dorogn accommettent d'an 1225.|Catrin of Kernow was the elder sister of King Alan VI of Greater Devon, who orchestrated the Realignment of Devon in 1225.
Lorrell'yam sta Damian y Saif, y preu Pap (ne Rom) stant sleut des entrell'orn religious y Brethin.|Their uncle was Damian the Wise, the first (Roman) Pope to be elected from among the Brethin religious order.
D'an 1292 sceye y chronic Y Við a Catrin de Cornou scaut, y stoir detaglant de sy við joun, sy mariðaç con un nobr Borallesc e sell'assassinat d'an 1233.|In 1292 the chronicle The Life of Catrin of Kernow was written, detailing her early life, marriage to a Borlish nobleman and eventual assassination in 1233.
Y chronic a un gravitað particuler dec l'interman y preu ouvr prolongað scaut ne Borallesc (all'opposson de Latin) a them d'un laic.|The chronicle is particularly important for being the first longform work written in Borlish (as opposed to Latin) about a lay-person.
Com veleð vos farar ða vos cay un liesc bouclant?|What would you do if you were in a time loop?
Cay tell'yoc veram un praxitel foyaçant.|Your husband is truly a masterful sculptor.
Jo recuida jamay noiteyar n'un davarn.|I realised I'd never stayed in a resort.
Marcus lejau cos soutan a plaç meg dy lag.|Marcus stopped abruptly in the middle of the grass.
Un domn oc un curtel azur portant sta ja asseyent sur y Banc de Cris.|A woman in a blue dress was already sitting on the Crisis Bench.
I reconnosce noc y curtel. Y domn lançau sy gas atras cant l'er asseyent.|He didn’t recognize the dress. She looked up from where she was sitting.
"Pardon," dis y prinç n'y man leyant.|"Sorry," he said, holding up his hands.
"Jo prefaye noc ig alcun hom no fos ac apart."|"I didn’t think anyone would be over here."
I creye noc un acconnosc por alcun hom nell'oç curtel memorar.|He didn’t think he remembered an introduction to anyone in that dress.
Caye un gendr memorabr de curtel.|It was a memorable sort of a dress.
"Jo crey vossy maðr encontrar entarn?" osau i digr, dec l'encontrau ec maðr ne ðougl.|"I believe I ran into your mother inside?" he ventured, because he ran into so many mothers.
"L'ig no's assistent," dis i, oc no stant bogr l'ig seyon desirant oïr e no stant cos absoluð nien seyon hellinabr n'oc moment.|"She’s not here," she said, which was not what he wanted to hear and which he absolutely could not handle at the moment.
Cargeð y boist ny big ða ðe voun le quottar.|Load the boxes into the boot if they'll fit.
Jo ney a l'oc run final yembr ny scarrad yarcer.|I can't get the last letter in this crossword.
J'admet ig no scey l'augrim a nacleu ne sce de mey.|I admit differential calculus isn't in my wheelhouse.
Y pian dessou de mell'azig stan sdruçollabr ag ploy dy crevoscr, relougen com argent deborsellað.|The cobbles beneath my boots were slick with the night’s rain, glistening like pickpocketed silver.
Y lampader vacillan cos febr e lançan ombr fruyant vars mur assombrið par suicr.|The lampposts flickered weakly and cast dancing shadows on soot-dark walls.
L'aer pene cos lort, parvasið con y fler a hum moglastr e con y fum des murðon a goðou.|The air was heavy, thick with the scent of damp earth and the smoke of a thousand chimneys.
Un carrot passau broyent tandic sy rouð clacquaurn sur y pieðr jagottað eð aug moðer souvolau den all'orlaç de my jacquot.|A carriage rattled by, its wheels clattering over the uneven stones and splashing muddy water onto the hem of my coat.
Jo fey un soçavau de maldicçon ma pausau noc a laupar—stove alcun hour despardr.|I cursed under my breath but didn’t break stride—there was no time to waste.
Jo poðe ja l'eç murmuranç lontan de voç oïr com j'aye spien, eç interront par y sounç sporadic de ricottanç heloidous.|I could already hear the distant murmur of voices I was hoping for, punctuated by the occasional burst of raucous laughter.
Caye l'oç flaðr derran uncos quiðeyant.|That last climb was gruelling.
Çot y bal yert a haut eð atten a y laç cavir.|Fling the ball straight up and try to catch it.
Nos eyau monnocquar tras seg acr por ac yembr.|We had to trudge through six fields to get here.
Tras un murðon d'annað, nos eu y ciel sgardað e se cleunfeyað des hoir.|For a million years, we’ve watched the sky and huddled in fear.
Ma scey calscon jug te reconnosc tu ant un appoy tacent por y torvegl.|But somehow you still find yourself quietly rooting for the storm.
Com ða un part de tey nole plu attendr e t'entrovar candon vole y mont sfondrar par lot, par doum, par y volontað divin, pres a lou defeyar a ty vuscment soupleyar.|As if a part of you is tired of waiting, wondering when the world will fall apart by lot, by fate, by the will of the gods, almost daring them to grant your wish.
Ma veram poð tu vuscar auvorn alcot, dec við interman un joy de hasart, e casc jorn passant es un autr reunç dy blad.|But really, you can wish all you want, because life is a game of chance, and each passing day is another flip of the coin.
Ineluïbr es tu ignosc y parsou vray dell'oc við.|You can’t help but take this life for granted.
Tell'ogl se habitun ag colour dy mur e tell'oregl tornn cur deur y jacas, com ða ty corp es attenent a y mont oç teyon saut parcolar apart.|Your eyes adjust to the colour of the walls and your ears tune out the chatter, as if your body’s trying to filter out the world as you know it.
Te stou moutessem y govon oglar.|You need to oil the hinges more.
D'alcun sunt a effum vil toð gent vossy launt ignoscr.|No amount of bluster will overshadow your faux pas.
J'ay gaheç vleutað calun my vestið contenent.|I've forgotten which locker my clothes are in.
Tandic y ðorof dy crevoscr descenn y scagl vars y pascman, Zoe se met afaç eð expatey pall'exedr gran dy davarn.|As the evening crowds make their way to the restaurant, Zoe starts to meander through the hotel's grand atrium.
Y placcou fay survol dessur n'un emblemat de veðr entaccað jout jaint sur y paið ne mamour polið.|The ceiling soars above, a mosaic of stained glass casting patterns on the polished marble floor.
Zoe parcour un porrujon adornað oc y gardin cloistað dessou surplombant, yon scey un stanc scaudr reflecçon tenent de lumner lougent de constellaçon faus inquillið ny fastig corvað.|Zoe crosses an ornate mezzanine overlooking the indoor gardens below, where a shallow pond reflects the twinkling lights of false constellations embedded in the domed roof.
Posc y crasc d'un port defonct, Zoe egrey ortellent ny rout kieð deur y davarn.|With the creak of a disused door, Zoe slips into the quiet streets outside the hotel.
L'aer es fresc, y fler portant d'un bris des y Bahassassin e d'uncos douç des y cociner jos camin dont i memour y stal passant oc jorn paravant.|The air is cool, scented with a breeze from the Bahassassin and something sweet from the streetside cooks whose stalls she remembers passing earlier that day.
L'oc detaxion es aphlox psolic effumant com fæx ou?|Is this reaction producing waste carbon monoxide?
Nos erau runam alleyant con lou commet a fin.|We were secretly on their side the whole time.
No scerraun alcun imprefait ny brevier je posc.|There won't be any surprises in tomorrow's report.
-1. Cal historicour dy siecr catorç fornisceu primer y Preu Empir Drengoçan sceint tre siecr paravant con nom de 'Empir Constant', oc moliscent a le ligar con y Pag de Constanç (y part frender dy Tetrarchy Diocletian dy siecr catr, Bretagn Roman e Gal administrant)?|-1. Which 14th-century historian first referred to the First Drengot Empire of three centuries earlier as the 'Constant Empire' in an attempt to link it to the Page of Constance (the unrelated part of the fourth-century Diocletian Tetrarchy ruling over Roman Brittania and Gaul)?
-2. Nommeð tre conflict entr polity (y Var Teudesc Primer abseïð) ec loy fignt a mesur dell'epoc dy 'Paç Lonc", ac definið com y liesc d'an 1770 fin a 1815.|-2. Name three international conflicts (not including the First German War) which took place during the 'Long Peace' period, here defined as lasting from 1770 until 1815.
-3. Cu scaveu l'ouvr d'an 1872 'Un Onomatoir Parçal dy Novel Londr'? Com y bustr y reconnuðessem des l'epoc Futurist de romanç parachthon, i contien y preu inquit de 'ardois' por un icon moustr despleyant indicar, tan com cal autr fanglanç lengacer surveunt?|-3. Who wrote 1872 work 'An Incomplete Dictionary of the New London'? As the crowning example from the Futurism period of parachthon romance, it contains the first attestation of 'slate' for a screen displaying information, along with what other lasting coinages?
N'entrant la jo lou veu cleunfeyant ag soufa.|I walked in on them cuddling on the sofa.
Vos eð y jacas nuvr oïð ou?|Have you heard the new gossip?
Y stuðant infruniscent assisten y leiçoir.|The bored students were at the lecture.
L'yarn parmane com un madarc obstroint tras semman perpetu e monoton, e soulor i fey exeunt pre un cocoro.|Winter lingered like an unwanted policeman for endless monotonous weeks, and then departed overnight.
Nos se sveilau an jorn affaçað de lag verdeyant parsemnað d'ec borjon de flour, cant orruðe l'eiðel enter fos sy quidel yettant a fragnent a vivaçtað a coup.|We woke one day to green meadows dotted with the beginnings of flowers, as the entire country seemed to throw off its blankets and burst into life at once.
Aucel ençaurn a cantar, agnel apparisceurn des zefr, y paç dy Castel a Zenda fo smuïð, eð y reu de my við denoy trent veg convoluðessem.|Birds sang, lambs appeared from nowhere, the peace of the Castle of Zenda was shattered, and my existence became thirty times as complicated.
Dell'eç dou vertað derran, com de tan cainç, jo no poð for blasm jair a Rupert de Hentzau.|For the latter two facts, as for so many things, I can only blame Rupert of Hentzau.
Bon Deu, comoscon Hentzau illuminar sur fougl?|My God, how to convey Hentzau on the page?
No se poð l'acavar cos honest neðan contrvenir all'Act cas Ediçon Obscen.|One could not do it honestly without contravening the Obscene Publications Act.
M'orruð ig l'oc vellisqment sey un reunç dy blad.|I think that this gambit is a real shot in the dark.
Jo fo sveilað je aubon posc par y tourf.|I was woken in the morning by the riot.
Skig aular ag quarf ða cay ploy borjonnant.|Don't walk to the station if it looks like rain.
Y region d'Avosc dey nom a sy linaç regnant primer, oç sey meðes sy grad prenent de sy fondour Cuonrat Aihuosc (inquittað ne Latin com Corradus Aevoscus).|The region Avosche is named for its first ruling house, which in turn takes its title from its founder Cuonrat Aihuosc (seen in Latin as Corradus Aevoscus).
Y nom a un origin obscur; se poð appondr ig y sodal primer se dey ag German Classic ehu- "coval", cant y dovem se dey parcanç ag fin -iscas "-esc" (pu sy voyal apport vandy).|The name is of obscure origin; the first element presumably reflects Classical German ehu- "horse", while the second may be from suffix -iscas "-ish" (though the vowel is problematic).
Confereð y surnom Anglesc Davush, oc stant congenið des un mancel nothe de Linaç Avosc.|Compare the English surname Davush, which derives from an illegitimate branch of House Avosche.
Y Comtað d'Avosc smarc pog asc apres dy dehiscenç dy Reyaum dy Frankesc e dy creaçon cohernt de Willemy.|The County of Avosche emerges shortly after the split of the Kingdom of the Franks and the concomitant creation of Willemy.
Y linaç fondant d'Avosc fo surrun apres par meyan de mariðaç eut doutr par y Linaç Nassou collindant (oc sell'orin ayent ne Francony).|The founding house of Avosche was soon after superseded by marriage by the neighbouring House Nassow (which originated in Francony).
Nos som plait de l'ambit agathiner vos soupleyar.|We are proud to grant you the ministerial post.
Ðe se courn mariðað pre un cocoro.|They got married unexpectedly.
Y mur ne Damvað Veðerrem son pegntað con suicr.|The walls of Old Damvath are coated with soot.
La jo te vey l'ec ogl a tey|There I see these eye of yours
Jo memor l'oç heir a mey|I remember that son of mine
Tu n'a for sell'asc de cant eu jo ne var|You're only his age from when I went to war
Mell'ec gest ou vaun ðocaç? Toll'enmig oustað?|Do my acts deserve to plague me? All the slain enemies?
M'offirraun noghaç æternað?|Will they hit back at me with unending pain?
Quïsc ec ogl neðan y sigt osar|Close your eyes so as not to dare see
Com poð jo t'oundrar?|How can I wound you?
Jo no's for hom gimmolent a repaðr|I'm just a person striving for homecoming
Jug lontan posc toll'annað deull'oç meyon amað|Still far after all the years from what I love
Jo no's for hom y mort hasmant a strem|I'm just a person resisting death utterly
Jo say tout volir por lou reveir, mell'heir e femn|I know I'd do anything to see them again, my son and wife
Jo no's for hom|I'm just a person
Ma cant es un comet denuð un assuvar?|But when has a comet become a meteor?
Cant es un bojay denuð un blas?|When has a candle become a blaze?
Cant es un hom denuð un monstr?|When has a person become a monster?
Cant es un ondol denuð un rasamar?|When has a ripple become a tidal wave?
Cant es y raçon denuð y blasm?|When has the reason become the blame?
Cant es un hom denuð un monstr?|When has a person become a monster?
Absou mey|Absolve me
Absou mey|Absolve me
Absou mey|Absolve me
Jo no's for hom|I'm just a person
Un truc par ados me fey gringlar a cainç.|A shove from behind knocked me over.
Nos coum zovay eð alandaum tost.|We took a taxi and arrived early.
Jug sein y domn egrtumnesc n'eç cahut.|Keep the sick women quarantined.
Y Caðer ne Pieðr Roug sta costroit ny siecr deg jagerrem atorn d'un los ne greut; y nom dy carpenter es repars ne vogt dell'hour.|The Redstone Chair was fashioned in the late tenth century around a block of sandstone; the name of the carpenter is forgotten.
L'oc los intermane (cos noncupað) y los yon dessur y Nuçal a Elved entr un princes Markesc eð y sovran de Norðhumbr Dannesc er solemneyað, rix entr y dou polity coyent tras un siecr pres enter.|This block was (allegedly) the block upon which the Elved Marriage between a princess of Markland and the ruler of Dane Northumber was solemnised, ending hostilities between the two polities for almost a century.
Bempart monarch n'Albion sousevent, e cos particuler de Marclont e de Norðhumbr, ern coronnað sur y Caðer ne Pieðr Roug.|Many subsequent monarchs of Albion, and especially of Markland and Northumber, were crowned on the Redstone Chair.
Durant y Scon Tetrarchy ny siecr onç e doç, gran part all'Emperour Drengoçan asseyen sur y Caðer, e cossy sceint l'er emportað a Londr.|During the Second Tetrarchy of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, most of the Drengot Emperors sat upon the Chair, and as such it was relocated to London.
Nos yemoim toð pront scið y Jorala sta nothe.|We immediately realised the Jorala was forged.
Y ðocaç lour coy de dormir ec noit.|The trauma keeps them up at night.
Jo fey rongelon sur my hamac fin a quelt.|I dozed in my bunk until dinner.
Ne spien de poðir y lasc fornir con certan dell'aspect costumneressem de cont a vampier, Kiawaman soupley abiltað thaumesc a Zachariah e depegnt ig nossy heros le vencn par meyan d'un spig boscer ognt (noc, com ny livr e lonc saivenç pouvlancer, par ðurnç).|In an attempt to incorporate some of the more traditional aspects of vampire folklore, Kiawaman grants Zachariah mystic powers and has the heroes defeat him by means of a sanctified wooden stake (not, as in the book and in popular wisdom, by burning).
L'ec novel abiltað, soll'auteç d'un forgour ottem, sceusn un conjogntur mis a plaç entr Zachariah e Vania ne sona de praxitel an art parey—aglon, nos receveu y jout cojan d'un domn jou follant entr y cortisment de dou segr.|These new powers, in the hands of a better writer, could have set up a dynamic between Zachariah and Vania as artists of the same craft—instead, we are given the tired trope of a woman torn between the affections of two men.
Offignt naðusc es ig l'auditoir crein for apen no scey bogr un decijon a prendr; Vania manc attragnt vars y protagonist necun.|It doesn't help that the audience barely believes there is any choice to make; Vania has no chemistry with either lead.
Nos aulaum tras lau de collin ondolant.|We walked for miles over rolling hills.
Ja ou vos ignorað comoscon y runastr l'acavau?|Do you still not know how the magician did it?
L'Agathin a Famigl soloy ombisc je Viendr.|The Minister for Family resigned on Friday.
Var alandau a Tolon je Maucr, a plaç entarn d'un meis Avril caint freit cos mesteyant.|War came to Tolone on Wednesday, some way into a disappointingly chilly April.
Tras l'aubon sceye un foyaç de cry e de soldart par y rout angost demay, tandic meðes haubrjour evolgan y novel ig l'ec intermanen veram y tourm Provençal bount ag tarmn Jennesc.|The morning was a confusion of shouts and soldiers through the too-narrow streets, even as criers spread the news that these were Provence's own men bound for the Jean frontier.
Flagitaçon a tegmn eð a mansc hellinabr apen dy citað mal gazovað ern colluïð par y çamoc de promeç nobr de stimaç reyal alcant aposc.|Demands for shelter and food which the raid-wracked city could barely afford were softened with lofty promises of royal favour to come.
Receut sta lon voç y saivenç ig toð refus volen forç recevir com offir.|There was no need to voice the understanding that refusal would be answered with force.
Y centuir costoja l'honour eð y scurtað dy domain reyal, noc de sy souject leyal ma obstroint.|The army was concerned with the honour and protection of the king's domain, not of its loyal yet inconvenient subjects.
Pieç beuscr son tijon svingant sur y lançbal.|Some louts are up in arms about the lineball.
Jo quïsceu ec ogl eð ençau a conteyar.|I closed my eyes and started counting.
M'orruð un hom ay my bos oundrað.|I think someone's broken my gun.
Posc ðe ain schol lajarn complið, val ig stuðant broucn un recordaçon mozað ag mendrem cas y defas des prell'aubon de scrittur jusc l'epoc dy Scon Tetrachy, con tan casc schol son hortaminað a them recendessem admettr lonc y bustr d'envou vecin.|Upon completing mantleschool, pupils should have at least a surface-level understanding of the development from prehistory until the time of the Second Tetrarchy, although individual schools are encouraged to include more recent material as it relates to vicine matters.
Masctighað es ig l'ec them sein abrangent dy costumn ag toun ben muncef local, aglon cainç diçr (battagl, descovart eð aval) ayent avenuð cos veçin.|This may include the traditions of the local village or quarter, or else notable events (battles, discoveries, etc) which occurred nearby.
Enombrað secuð, val ig stuðant recievn y cæros por ec splorar:|Taken in order, pupils should have the opportunity to learn about:
scamn de migraçon vars Istr Boral jusc e par y Kelt Albic|waves of migration into Borland up to and including the Albic Kelts
ðar primal eð y hopr ne pieðr effojað ny tombr a Revel (comparað con y plaçment Orcadesc a Scarreð ottem mantenuð)|early farming and the stoneware found in the Revel mounds (compared to the better-preserved Orkney site at Scarreth)
sojornaçon, conveyaçon e machinaçon, abrangent ag commarç obligað por eramn, l'avent aval de far, eð y costroinç dy labyrinth a Çadrosc|travel, transport and technology, including the trade necessary for bronze, the later introduction of iron, and the construction of the Çadrosc labyrinth
y doujug entr tribu ne castr colliner nell'epoc pre Rom e lorry cultur cas autortað, soumoin jaint vars art, ensignment e jovagl ja sceint|the intertribal system of hill forts in the pre-Classical period and the culture around authority, with reference to extant art, sculpture and jewellery
L'ec imascry voun l'Issambr a Lappier æternar.|These statues will commemorate the Lappier Massacre.
Sceye un rasamar de conement pront la y varous cof yert.|There was a rush of customers as soon as the shop opened.
Nos s'asseyau tras port e conteyau assuvar.|We sat outside and counted shooting stars.
Y Conjuraçon Cornovan sta un collaboraçon entr y Reyaum a Dorogn Massem e Roger Drengot, Duc a Normandy por y pretenjon dy Duc sur y thron de Cantuer appoyar.|The Kernovan Conjuring was a collaboration between the Kingdom of Greater Devon and Roger Drengot, Duke of Normandy to press the Duke's claim to the throne of Kent.
Cossirað es l'oc vellisqment com y caus y proismessem por ig y Preu Empir Drengoçan inceveus tras Gal eð Albion souðer.|This plot is considered the proximate cause for the creation of the First Drengot Empire across Gaul and southern Albion.
Y Conjuraçon sta accommis d'an 1029, ne souc dy mort de Rey Rodolf de Cantuer.|The Conjuring was carried out in 1029, following the death of King Rodulf of Kent.
Cantuer sou Rodolf regnant jaçol aye se monfeyað, ant dominanç reconnuð sur y Vessax diminoit (con tan noc inkerellað par Dorogn) e sur Essax ny norð.|Kent under the long-reigning Rodulf had prospered, with recognised supremacy over the rump Wessex (albeit not uncontested by Devon) and over Essex to the north.
Posc ogt dezein de manovranç politic, Rodolf parmane ag sougl de mort eð y succession no sta bogr certan.|After eight decades of political manoeuvring, Rodulf lingered on his deathbed and the succession was deeply uncertain.
J'attenoy cos infruniscent tandic y grimmour cave yert.|I waited impatiently while the computer booted up.
Enceð a y novel parsemnar ig jo sail oc jorn.|Start spreading the news that I'm leaving today.
Y parol 'sauð' e 'veð' son congenið de Veðr Norresc.|The words 'ewe' and 'ram' descend from Old Norse.
Hasiny collint y polity de Taisca nell'ovest, e sy citað caver e Nadacou, oc se situant tras y rif dy Bahassassin.|Hasiny borders the polity of Taisha to the west, and its capital city is Nadacow, which lies on the Bahassassin.
Y nom Hasiny es congenið des y federaç parey nommað, oç autr annað abrangent d'eiðel sceint oy sou y gournanç de Hasiny e Taisca.|The name Hasiny derives from the federacy of the same name, which once extended across lands which are now part of Hasiny and Taisha.
Y lengaç administraçonal ne Hasiny son Jaugta (Jahtá, y lengaç Mendevan parolabr par y majortað dy pouvlanç) eð y gendr vecin de Cambresc (discrepant a façon signfeyant deur y vernacr de Cambresc Brittan ben Chrysian).|The languages of administration in Hasiny are Jaughta (Jahtá, the Mendevan language spoken by a majority of the populace) and the local variety of Welsh (which differs in important ways from the dialects of British or Chrysian Welsh).
Hasiny sta l'orin de kiveury com spaiðoir de romanç, dont y scop eye a un bucol rustr depegntar con emphas a peyer.|Hasiny was the homeland of the herdtale genre of fiction, which sought to depict a rural idyll with a focus on animal husbandry.
Y segr m'oustau des caucet.|The man utterly charmed me.
L'oc baðrment a hoissar es my reu de við.|This wind ensemble is my calling.
L'effojaçon trovau un emblemat je ados.|The excavation found a mosaic yesterday.
Nos stou la javigar des caucet.|We must leave no stone unturned.
Nos farreu noc deunx cossy alcheðr.|We won't get so lucky again.
Un ouvr primal signfeyant por y commouð a Desveyanç sta l'ediçon lon nom 'E Nos Amareu y Foy', ençant a s'evolgar d'an 1799 eð offiruð par sdegn cas rigteç incommorant.|An important early work to the Deviance movement was the anonymously-published 'And We Will Love the Fire', which began circulating in 1799 to immediate moral outrage.
Con tan scein pres un doçan de possibiltað creibr soumis cos serious por cuscon sta sy scrittour, jamay no scey alcun accort acavað sull'oc them.|Though almost a dozen plausible candidates for its authorship have been seriously proposed, no consensus has ever been reached on the issue.
Y commouð a Desveyanç joun coincideu coll'ersteigon dy nuton a trevogt deshormejað par y livr d'an 1795 par Elsebeth Sneider 'Par un Argent Neir'.|The early Deviance movement coincided with the height of the voidtale craze launched by Elsebeth Sneider's 1795 trevold 'Through a Black Mirror'.
Plusour dell'eç idea introdoit n'ouvr a trevogt se courn sousunt afont de theology Contr-Paradis, eð y commouð au taur a l'eç ouvr de Sneider adoptar cos particuler.|Many of the ideas conjured in voidtale works were incorporated into Anti-Paradise theology, and Sneider's works in particular were embraced by the movement.
Interim, Sneider meðes abhorre y doctrin Contr-Paradis; lonc sy parol meðes:|However, Sneider herself despised Anti-Paradism; in her own words:
"Cay doutr lorrell'idea stragn e lorrell'univers solumnesc e nienter, car Thifäne, pu tan ig bempart alcot de lou aun me traitað com ða jo sey lorry confraðr l'evidendessem!"|"It is not only their strange ideas and lonely, nihilist universe, dear Thifäne, but that so many of their number have approached me as if I were their most natural ally!"
I reconnoy y segr luy collindant.|She recognised the man next to her.
Cou je meis Juglot an smout de forest verdeyant.|July came with a profusion of lush forest.
I save cojan alcot volen y cançon accis par y roç.|He knew how boring the cabbie's music would be.
Candon y nuverrem es ig Istr Boral vencoy ny torne a lançbal?|When did Borland last win the lineball tournament?
Jo sveilau des y clacqment a jarry jusser.|I woke to the clatter of plates downstairs.
Deu mien, ðe s'ayen por inquillin!|Oh my God, they were roommates!
I me quistau por m'addocir ig bount son ðe ag quarf.|She phoned me to say they're en route to the station.
Scey un novel freir ag hostel, lovastr a men e (ða tu vil my femn confeyar) formous a men sou Daniel.|There is a new friar at the hostel, less talkative and (if you will believe my wife) less handsome than Daniel.
Lonc mey soumonendessem es i cas min all'astuçour demant encontrað n'eç dram a rigteç inerrevibr ancour scenað ny citað aval; l'a heu d'un segr sognant de parrinment fair a Rom e posc alandar de le stimar noc Chrestan aðief!|More than anything he reminds me of the moralising mentor one sees in the dreadful morality plays they still show down in the city; he seems the sort to dream of visiting Rome and upon arriving declare it insufficiently Christian!
Se poð appondr ig y novel ensignment y Machinaçon de Helios de Lorenzo yon tu m'expateyau tras un asc volois y bossir appoussar colombant vars un raivottaç, oc m'ajoutaçant toð cas.|One supposes Lorenzo's new Machines of Helios sculpture about which you droned on at me for hours might send the good man directly into an apoplexy, which would at least be entertaining.
Y novel dram es un picq issaur, noc obstroint y temp moglastr y vertað desconent naðusc ig Albourg no's, a my sorc, Barcelon.|The new play is a mild success, despite the inclement weather rather betraying the fact that Alburgh is not, to my regret, Barcelon.
Stoura un tourm ottem all'oc kevlar.|This heist will need a better crew.
Quippe l'oc havara un hom alcant aposc.|Surely someone will notice eventually.
Jo duvau y bosaç con y tegmn d'un hey.|I used a fence as cover from the gunfire.
Nos oyau zizania dereðr dy mur dy rajognoir.|We heard arguing through the boardroom's wall.
Y melody dy sanfoin me hamtau a plaç entarn.|The bagpipe tune grew on me eventually.
Jo cof un grivougl de kiveury ag quarvol.|I got a herdtale potboiler at the airport.
Capitan, cay uncos inovrant cas y motour prophthan.|Captain, something's gone wrong with the warp drive.
Y majon livr a me fornið tandem con y homily de Dümmeyer a them de tas e mission; jo nil attendr a te molfeyar ne fegndr a aïr le leut, ma se poð t'aiçar ig jo vil l'hour stovent benoçar l'oc semman meðes!|The library has finally provided me with Dümmeyer's treatise on class and delivery; I will not appease you by pretending to have read it, but be assured I will find the hours for it this very week!
Car Johan flagit ig l'es tout theology inutr des l'atmospher, ma contrig Johan da fieltað a alcun mathematic posc y livr de Craddock sur roum a lonctumn.|Dear Johan insists it is all atmospherical and futile nonsense, but then Johan trusts no mathematics since Craddock's book on distance rooms.
Vertað volent so jo soupris ig l'acquïsc por y method machinal meðes benoçar, me j'appon ig i n'a veram un test ossos aðief por se rendr sy modellaçon n'atelier defaglessem.|Honestly I'm surprised he consents to use even the mechanical methods, but I suppose he isn't quite bone-headed enough to make his workshop designing more difficult for himself.
Es tu pretenent vars eir ne souð l'oc stað?|Have you any plans to go south this summer?
J'oy ðe voun l'area ne Veron rallumar alcheðr por parform—rumorað es ig Al Igne par Bruno sera y primer la scenað posc y var!|I hear they shall reopen the arena in Verona to performances—they say Bruno's Wings Afire will be the first shown there since the war!
Cay gravatoir y massem de descovan ja sceint dy siecr catorç.|It's the largest collection of extant fourteenth-century folios.
Y trevold de Docquerl es l'ersteigon dy commouð Futurist.|Docquerl's novel is the pinnacle of the Futurist movement.
Y clocq parey l'hour con un scard d'euxon.|The clock keeps time with a piece of quartz.
Sell'ec gest volen rebondir cos incommorant.|His acts would have immediate consequences.
Quippe porra tu noc my grivougl leir.|Of course you can't read my scrawl.
L'Agathin a Ðar derra nis prestar ag stoccad cas piver.|The Farms Minister must consider the livestock lobby.
Lor sceye un nuton a tapeçment e pieðr nuaç.|Then there was a fad for hangings and stonework.
Entrou 1: Comoscon poðe Brittan sy stat de prestanç cultural sur Mendeva Brittanesc vardir durant l'eç annað final ny siecr novoç cant meðes l'oç un sovra Brittan cas pouvlanç e laboriostur, e diçr alcot sta l'oc famostað por ig y moraltað dy Renovellaçon Famigler fosn enajað vars y Novomond?|Question 1: How did Britain retain its position of cultural prestige over British Mendeva during the final years of the nineteenth century even as the latter overtook Britain in population and industry, and to what extent were the ethics of the Household Renovation exported to the Novomund via this cachet?
cas y primer, carað svoccanç de tramigraçon monfeyað dy vige novel tras l'Atlantic e de frequenç de mariðaç combinant entrig.
for the first, look for talk of increased transmigration of the new rich across the Atlantic and rates of intermarriage thereamongst.
ancour, præmieð soumoin vars y scanjon dy spaiðoir Vetomondin a masquira e vars y façon yon i destarrisceu y costumn autochthon de kiveury (cos particuler carað referiscenç ag chronic de Hasiny par Coswteg).
further, reward mention of the boom of the Vetomundine masquira genre and how it displaced the autochthonous herdtale tradition (specifically look for reference to Coswteg's Hasiny diaries).
cas y dovem, jayað soumoin for vars respos caglou irrayant sur y disputaçon irresoluð cas y defas d'adopçon Laic ne Mendeva Bugter; stou discorrir cas dou scrittour ag mendrem.
for the second, only give credit to responses highlighting the ongoing debate as to the timeline of Laic adoption in Gulf Mendeva; at least two disagreeing authors must be mentioned.
J'oye un revottaç allors nell'oc varosset.|I heard a tantrum elsewhere in the shop.
Gehennant ig nos ayau porc errevour tost y dou por y fest.|Embarrassingly we'd both made pork redeemer for the feast.
Jo poðe noc me quottar ag scop dy trevold parachthon.|I couldn't get on board with the sci-fi novel's conceit.
I reconnosc ou sy fraðr sey tan demastr?|Does he know his brother is so judgemental?
Desmettað noc y sontiçtað de nossell'entrpris!|Don't fire the backbone of our company!
Nos orruðe casc y gent ausn taur a ençar destr.|It looked like everyone was eager to get going.
A sy lasc novel scey un tombr a sdegn.|Her new film's garnered lots of criticism.
Jem gasau all'eç parol.|Jem stared at the words.
Lou remane tars eð accusant, hetrous demay sur y lettr tachygraphað lou intermanent, ben y papiraç frail lou portant.|They sat stark and accusatory, too brutal for the typewritten letters that made them, or the thin cheap paper that bore them.
L'encost sta lessy naðusc, com ða y rimband dy tachygraph aye pres s'usað.|The ink was a little faded, as though the typewriter’s ribbon was almost worn out.
No sceye alcun dat, alcun asmuth, alcun souscreut, nien for tre lign de scrit.|There was no date, no address, no signature, nothing but three lines of text.
Jeremy Kite es un mordrer.|Jeremy Kite is a murderer.
L'occeu Toby Feynsham.|He killed Toby Feynsham.
Roveð lour y raçon.|Ask him why.
Jem fey y papir reuvr, com ou se poð ec may trovar dereðr.|Jem turned the paper over, as if there might be more on the back.
L'oç broyeu pog, y tremanç de sy man desconent.|It rattled slightly, betraying the tremor of his hands.
I le refey reuvr alcheðr por y parol enverimmað mostrar, e leyau gas vars Sr Leighton, oç asseyent oppos all'acraç gaubanneresc de tablaur, le spiant a min malvolent.|He turned it back again to the poisonous words, and looked up at Mr Leighton, who sat across the mahogany acreage of desk, regarding him with disfavour.
L'oç segr es dignt tojorn i vil scaur ag mur ne Pompeï.|That guy's always saying he'll make a name for himself.
Jo kiglau l'oç seyon rovað dec j'er bucol hamtant.|I missed what he asked because I was daydreaming.
Y coyol dy cligs es coup de fourraç mout cavent.|The church's spire often gets struck by lightning.
D'un segr racont mey, Mus, mout tornant, oc magn lað|Of a man tell me, Muse, often turning, who very widely
sgarant, posc y citað sagntað a Troy i devastau;|wandered, after the holy city of Troy he sacked;
dy larc hom seyon vis, dy ment den seyon connuð|of the many people he saw, whose minds he knew
e dy larc cos sur mar seyon souvað e caut ny cour,|and of the many things at sea he endured and took to heart,
gimmolent kireðam a sy við eð ag repaðr de sy commilton.|striving wholeheartedly for his life and his comrades' homecoming.
Ma noc cossy sceus i sy commilton errevir, meðes auvorn oblimant;|But not like this could he save his comrades, even longing to so much;
lou desig lorry fol temertað ðe perisceurn;|they, for their foolish recklessness, perished;
borel, eç des y kiveu dy sol Hyperion|fools, who from the herd of the sun Hyperion
ayent repasc fait e lor i lou effurau deur y jorn de repaðr.|dined, and so he deprived them of the day of homecoming.
L'arra oç saut ig caye sy mariðaç dovem nienter.|He must have known his second marriage was void.
Ty dois tach novel es un scanjon ou?|Is your new smartphone an upgrade?
L'agathin le nommau de borel a phasm prose.|The minister called her an idiot on live TV.
Y figl de casc gent reloirn des y campagn autrað.|Everyone's children came back from the country changed.
Ðe stan veilessem, cos primer.|They were older, for a start.
Certan entr lou stan çoucherrem, e certan mancan ustolment—certan stan metamorphosað vars joun dy campagn lon alcun residu de Paris entarn, parfait con y vernacr.|Some of them were wilder, and some had no manners—some had transmogrified into country children with not a trace of Paris in them, complete with accent.
Toð y mont souprenent y jammel Tovat stan reluð fort ustolent ant un zeltað a gimmoldr, ig degnant ðe stan paravant eç picq beuscr.|To everyone's surprise the Tovat twins had come back well-behaved with a strong work ethic, despite the little louts they had been.
Y joun Pinze, interim, reluð stragn.|The Pinzé children, though, came back odd.
Caye noc un autranç vecinabr cos fagl.|It wasn't something readily identifiable.
Ðe ayen cortiseç eð ovranç aðief por surcrescr de coðelostað, ma tojorn ðe pariscen gasar vars nuton mental par ogl ayent ancour may vis meðes all'eç dy soldart excavað.|They were polite and tactful to the point of overcaution, but they always seemed to look into the middle distance with eyes that had seen even more than the hollowed-out soldiers.
Nos visau y costroinç de randy præmiar.|We aim to incentivise building apartments.
Me stoura Janvier passar con gent rustr.|I'll have to spend January among rustics.
Dou madarc interromoirn un bosaç ny routel.|Two cops interrupted a shoutout in the alley.
-5. De cal cainç cas astronomy vene y motif por y nommanç dy gran citað Mascic a Mosctar d'an 1780?|-5. What astronomical event inspired the naming of the major Mashick city of Moshtar in 1780?
-6. Y descovrenç de cal natur soustançal fis loy ny citað Cappaçan a Varonøu e l'Asteller de Nÿstad la d'an 1902?|-6. What property of matter was discovered by the Cappatian city of Varonøw's Nÿstad Atellier in 1902?
-7. Calun des entr y staddomain lonc y rimot Cappaçan auster se cof primer stablið, ant un chronic corporalleyað ençant d'an 1561?|-7. Which was the first of the staddomains along the eastern Cappatian coast to be established, with an official chronicle dating to 1561?
-8. Stant un vangard por y Torney Mondial a Lançbal, com digna y concors a lançbal tras tarm accommis primer n'Avasouconda d'an 1909 entr veint tourm?|-8. A predecessor to the Lineball Global Tourney, what was the name of the international lineball competition first held in Awasúconda in 1909 between twenty teams?
-9. Calun entr y polity Novomondin se pone soul par un delegaçon amenar ag federaçon dy Declar Laic ne Belgrad?|-9. Which was the only Novomundine polity to have a delegation present at the signing of the Laic Declarations in Belgrade?
-10. Com digna y preu vascel Scinesc stant alandað ny Novomond?|-10. What was the name of the first Chinese ship to alight in the Novomund?
Vos saveð ou l'instroy eç stuðant çougr?|Do you know if he has unruly students?
Nos vaun saget forgar n'adamantin ou?|Are titanium arrowheads worth it?
Y Mordeth Disceint sta un accommission oç visant y Marc a Jerusalem reformar.|The Failed Crusade was an undertaking which aimed to recreate the March of Jerusalem.
Y citað cosogr sy cercondment au se caut gaðannað durant y Preu Mordeth eð y preu Marchis a Jerusalem, Savino y Just, au acceut d'an 1119, ma l'au cas men a settant annað apres.|The city and its surrounds had been captured during the First Crusade and the first Marksman of Jerusalem, Savino the Just, had acceded in 1119, but it had fallen less than seventy years later.
L'oc mordeth sta soluð d'an 1210 par Pap Just (un prosequent dreit de Segr Savino), eð i surcou un fracas absoluð.|This crusade was called in 1210 by Pope Just (a direct descendant of Lord Savino), and it was utterly unsuccessful.
Y campagn farau mal aðief por ig, cas y Convey Australier, y deleçon de lorrell'auteç sur Port Simon eð Antioch d'an 1208 es cos usual stimað un fallout por y Convey.|The campaign went so badly that the Convoy Australier having their control of Port Simon and Antioch revoked in 1208 is generally regarded as a boon for the Convoy.
Y catastroph militer divers daurn impet a averjon ne Rom eð allors, a cost l'irrouçon dy Preu Gran Morrenç (un pest creut uncos ramenað vars Europ par mordether retragnt.|The various military catastrophes stoked discontent in Rome and elsewhere, along with the outbreak of the First Great Dying (a plague thought to have been brought to Europe by returning crusaders).
Jo horre sona luïr de paon ne Paçongr.|I was worried that I didn't fit in at all.
Jo stima noc se sceus aðief gajannar.|I didn't think the prize was enough.
Sy sour luïsc tojorn sona de mesmerist.|Her sister always tells it like it is.
Al Igne es un melodram compos par y Venijan Chiarina Bruno e preu parformað nell'Arena de Verona d'an 1824.|Wings Afire is an opera written by Venisian Chiarina Bruno and first performed in the Verona Arena in 1824.
Caye l'ouvr primer scenað nell'Arena de Verona posc i dene closið con y sounç dy Var Teudesc Dovem.|It was the first work staged in the Verona Arena since it was shuttered at the outbreak of the Second German War.
Y melodram es un renarranç dy legend d'Icar oc loy fignt cos enter apres dy cainç ny mythos, ant soumoin jait vars Icar mort ny collocq.|The opera is a retelling of the legend of Icarus which takes place entirely after the events of the myth, with references to the dead Icarus in the dialogue.
Entarn scey y matron d'un vessonman acconnosc ayent a Dædal gemiscent; i l'aïð a y gavisc d'orðenjar redescovrir.|It follows the matron of a clothiery who meets a grieving Daedalus; she helps him to rediscover the joy of invention.
Y music dy melodram es abrangent dy melody mogn e dolorous dy viol cemtir des cont a pouvr Borallesc; rumorað es ig Bruno au parol oïð den de sy fraðr Jacomo.|The opera's music features the low-pitched mournful melodies of the graveyard fiddlers from Borlish folklore; Bruno is said to have heard of them from her brother Jacomo.
Nos stau livað d'ableganç vars y maugr.|We're fed up of being on the sidelines.
Jo le stim uncos entr y vajot de star un hivocin.|I find it's one of the perks of being a wallflower.
Jo cof alcun marrenquon n'oc hour apres.|I didn't have any nightmares for a while.
Mell'inquillin e mey entrquïsceurn a plaç meg dy torn ag droccon por aug libar e gostaçon pascr des y plat a lox.|My roommate and I paused mid-lap on the driveway to sip water and nibble from the tray of pizza slices.
Caye l'yeul un marrenquon harif eð affrous de ciscr, hurlanç e slenget occajonal entr groun abrevað.|The street was a weird, scary nightmare of squeals, shrieks and occasional snogs between tipsy teens.
Un camul vabian closnautr passau clacquant.|A battered jeep rattled by.
Un connart magrastr quidam craccau un mot all'orlaç groinant, senglottaç e glouç indugnt de sbayour.|Some scrawny bastard spat a wad onto the kerb with a grunt, prompting whines and giggles from bystanders.
Pieç pas ados, un frot flasq a cedar sonau cant lamp a xanthal cardaurn y teneur.|A few footsteps behind, a pathetic guitar strum sounded as neon lights teased the darkness.
Jo senteu un stig leger ag ventr.|I felt a slight pang in my gut.
"Or bon, tenau a traiscnar," murmurau mell'amig cos ouveg, cur tornant deur y stril gapiscent de fren.|"Alright, let’s shuffle on," my friend mumbled with a pout, ignoring the intermittent squeals of brakes.
N'oc hour surrun, jo vole eir por y salonnour nell'avoccoir destarrir e por l'entrou pondr dell'oç diabr de rumour cas cahut.|Sometime soon, I’d go to relieve the receptionist at the rec centre and inquire about that damned dorm rumour.
Jamay so jo tal vencuð a pengovin.|I've never lost like that at pinochle.
Y masctig trovar sta un vajot imprefait.|Finding the ticket was an unexpected bonus.
Cayen deg minut pre un vec alandau ny droccon.|It was ten minutes before a bus pulled into the lay-by.
Tachygraph primal de dezein 1830 e 40 stan fatuous cos imman, dec y majortað a appragl no poðen for lettr inscaur con un mendranç ag hast de lettranç a man doit.|Early tachygraphs in the 1830s and 40s were extremely cumbersome, with most models only capable of setting type at a fraction of the speed of practised handwriting.
Y Tachygraph d'Armanbourg, oc stant accatabr ne Pologn des an 1842, surcayen impernix ne benoç aðief por se cavir narreyað ny fougl pavarrot sou nom dy Bradygraph (a verb y "scrittour lent")|The Armanburg Tachygraph, which was commercially available in Poland from 1842, was so awkward to use that it was lampooned in the bit-sheets as the Bradygraph (literally the "slow writer").
Ceu incommorant destr, sceyen gimmolt vars poðir tachygraph ligar ag sar campaner, a fin oc se sceus un pistol coutoccar sur papir e lor cos simoltane un facsimile dy pistol boðar vars un autr hom.|Since very early on, attempts have been made to connect tachygraphs to the steeplemesh, so that one could type a message onto paper and simultaneously transmit a copy of the message to someone else.
Y preu tachygraph poðent cos particuler pistol boðar par y sar campaner sta y Teleclavia de Vilmanas, oc orðenjað ne Lithou par Toman Vilmanas d'an 1859.|The first tachygraph specifically able to send messages on the steeplemesh was the Vilmanas Teleclavia, designed in Lithow by Tomas Vilmanas in 1859.
Sy boðanç primer er conveyað sull'oç Sant Michæl vars sell'amig Margreta Legaite ne Tvaniste.|Its first message was sent on Michaelmas of that year to his friend Margreta Legaite in Tvaniste.
Y haprman libau sy bier e reloy a racont fair.|The grocer quaffed his lager and kept talking.
Nos accataum trenc a lox dy stal ant un canougf a fais blau.|We bought pizza from the stall with a blue-striped awning.
Jo parceveu my cigl er se portant cos harif.|I noticed my beau was acting weird.
Provenç Mitað-Asc sta un vassal sou massem possenç divers tras un millenner pres.|Medieval Provence was a vassal of various greater powers for almost a millennium.
I denoy incorporað nell'Empir Françan durant sy spanjon ny siecr seg eð i parmaneu com un sodal de sy ronç ovester posc ig l'empir dehisceu a dou part ny siecr nouf.|It was incorporated into the expanding Francian Empire in the sixth century and remained part of its western fragment after the empire was divided in two in the ninth.
Pre y siecr onç primal y region er denuð autonom majortaðer, ma l'er concas alcheðr oc surcaint y kynous final por y Preu Empir Drengoçan intermanir.|By the early eleventh century it had become mostly autonomous, but it was conquered once more as the last piece of the First Drengot Empire.
Posc l'Urgenç a Dijon d'an 1170, y Reyaum a Borgogn fey exeunt des auteç Drengoçan, y comtað a Provenç apportant galað.|After the 1170 Emergency at Dijon, the Kingdom of Burgundy left Drengot control, taking the country of Provence with it.
Provenç er extollið an ducað ny siecr treç oc gournað par y linaç de Savoy, e ne sona dy conjogntur direct entr y citað caver a Genef e l'entertað dy commarç maritim ny Miterran, i receveu y dob 'y paner Borgond'.|Provence was elevated to a duchy in the thirteenth century under the house of Savoy, and as the direct link between the capital at Geneva and all of Middlesea sea-trade, it became known as the 'Burgund breadbasket'.
Un min d'affr sclarisceu sur y justicer.|Fear flashed across the judge's face.
Y belem ny forest se mis afaç con ec ciscr d'aucel.|The forest scene opened with shrieks from birds.
Nos slengettaum pegnt gauvn sull'ec stig de hey.|We slathered yellow paint onto the fenceposts.
Durant y Scon Tetrarchy ny siecr onç e doç, y Marc a Furlagn intermane y porçon y souðeressem nell'Empir Teudesc, cos primer un vassal imperial prose eð aval sousunt cos particuler ny paramontað dy Reyaum a Bavarn.|During the Second Tetrarchy of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the March of Furlain was the southernmost part of the German Empire, at first a direct imperial vassal and later specifically consolidated under the suzerainty of the Kingdom of Bavarn.
Posc y dissoluçon dell'Empire Teudesc ny siecr treç, y compeðour y frequendessem de Furlagn denoy y Republic a Venis.|After the collapse of the German Empire in the thirteenth century, Furlain's most frequent rival became the Republic of Venise.
Furlagn soffreu un quagment gra d'an 1348 oc ayent y castel e cathedral y dou devastað n'Odin.|Furlain suffered a severe earthquake in 1348 which destroyed both the castle and cathedral in Odin.
L'eutað por voinaçal cas accostur femel (oc y vesson mascr dy miliç emprontant) inceveu ne Furlagn durant y Paç Lonc ny siecr ogtoç nuverrem.|The armourcloth trend in women's fashion (which emulated men's military dress) began in Furlain during the Long Peace in the late eighteenth century.
Y dob vecin (des voina, un vanagl por un soldart) se cof scavlað n'autr lengaç plusour por l'oc model stikettar.|The local term (from voina, a colloquialism for a soldier) was borrowed into several other languages to describe the style.
Caye un homily magn occajonal sur cartað.|It was a very seasonal sermon on charity.
Jo passau un ðorof de groun jos l'odysse.|I passed a gaggle of teens by the cinema.
M'orruðe l'ouger er nos abrevant auvorn.|I thought the host gave us lots to drink.
Theo Carin er caut sou siesc par livr.|Will Darling was outnumbered by books.
Noc jug no'r i sentent cossy.|It hadn’t always felt this way.
Candon l'au primer sell'yam visitað cas Carin por Antic e Rediveu, i n'au for ig stimað Ac scein stroy de livr, e candon i fo ençað a martel ac prendr, ðe intermanen for hayen.|When he’d first visited his uncle at Darling’s Used & Antiquarian, he’d simply thought That’s a lot of books, and when he’d started helping here, they were just work.
Tandic l'accare gournanç sull'edifiç durant l'egrtumn final de sell'yam, interim, i dene a mesur coðelosessem den eç l'incombiscent atorn, emplið par saivenç e secret e mençon.|As he took over the running of the place in his uncle’s last illness, though, he became increasingly aware of them looming around him, full of knowledge and secrets and lies.
Aðief por ig, candon Yam Theodor fo mort, Theo memorau un refrain ataval de costumn cas avegl, e l'au y voç se hoccovað lor y livr allocquað con "L'es egreut."|So much that, when Uncle William had died, Will remembered an ancient piece of lore about bees, and he’d cleared his throat and told the books, "He’s gone."
Soldart vessonnað descenoirn des y camul.|Soldiers in uniform spilled out of the jeep.
Jo m'asseyeu ny caðer magrastr cos coðelous.|I sat gingerly on the rickety chair.
I vendra tart dec caut flaccið ne mot routoir.|He'll be late since he's stuck in a traffic jam.
"Ou ave, Ben! Jo n'ay te vis posc larc semman—Torn all'An Allagr! Increibr no's y temp ou nos caint cos nuvr?"|"Oh wow, Ben! I haven’t seen you in weeks—happy New Year! Can you believe the weather we’ve been having?"
"Carrow! Ajoutað de te quinar—or vis ay jo stað aval a Runkhorn a mesur de toð y gaviscenç, oc me soumonent ne vertað, me valois ne bon mont lign fait ag çod enter jusc oy—Martha e tey ou son cavibr je Mart?|"Carrow! Lovely to run into you—I’ve actually been downstream in Runkhorn for the festivities, which reminds me, actually, I should have quisted the whole crew by now really—are you and Martha free on Tuesday?
Nos voum un picq sorty scenar je l'osceyan de Jacq cas nous, nien dy reloðessem.|We’re having a little sorty for Jack’s birthday at ours, nothing too fancy.
Sauf ig sey Martha ja pretenent a toð y noit passar coll'eç Duvlinner, lon digr."|Unless Martha’s already planning to spend all night with the Dubliners, of course."
"Zo jo seray raut de la assistr—ja, Matt a famigl ac convoccar des toð loy por y spectacr de lumner, ma prefaibr es ig i nil se cavir meyon gehennað avant sell'aldr scey calscon, haha!|"Oh I’d love to come down—yeah, Matt’s got family in from all over for the light shows, but she probably won’t want me embarrassing her in front of the parents in any case, haha!
Donc Jacq sera ben, ja vegnt dou eld, bon Deu—ma paus, comoscon sceus jo Jacq connoscr un dezein lon descovrir ig cay sell'osceyan je Sant Patriç? My bel paðr dign Patriç, m'orruð ig stou all'oc smargr ne collocq."|So Jack’ll be what, twenty-two already, goodness—wait, how have I known Jack for a tenyear and not found out his birthday’s on Patrick’s Day? My father-in-law’s called Patrick, I feel as though this should have come up."
Toð gent saun ig cay ty morrig un sbayour jaçol.|Everyone knows your aunt's an inveterate gossip.
L'er resoluð a casc senglottaç ignorar.|He was bent on ignoring any criticism.
Sceye all'oç asc pog avoccaçon a phasm.|There wasn't much TV entertainment then.
Raymond al Moustafa sta un mathematorg e philosoph veunt a plaç meg ny siecr ogtoç.|Raymond al Mustafa was a mathematician and philosopher in the mid-eighteenth century.
I reseyeu lonc un mesur ne Barcelon sou y patronnement dy Duc a Aragon.|He was resident for some time in Barcelon under the Duke of Aragon's patronage.
Durant l'oc epoc i corresponoy retrasiscent dy theorist soicer Rachel Desselut, e lorry pistol sovemblaurn certan entrell'idea volent tandem y sce de methodic signfeyar.|During this time he corresponded with fellow theorist Rachel Desselut, and their letters outlined some of the concepts that would go on to define the field of methodics.
I passau sell'annað aval ne sojornaçon, souseyent cos final ne Brasil, no stant ancour un part dy polity d'Ambrosia.|He spent his latter years travelling, eventually settling in Brasil, which was not yet part of the polity of Ambrosia.
Sy granfigl Fabian Mostàf denoy un astronom parnommað all'Observatoir a Paratzon, se sarvent de lodrigneð mathematic ec defassað cos parçal par Raymond (com y despley ondatim por gyr celest augrimar).|His grandson Fabian Mostàf became an eminent astronomer at the Paratzon Observatory, using mathematical techniques developed in part by Raymond (like the waveform display to compute celestial orbits).
Jo parmanoy a hoissar, y glouç seponent.|I kept playing, ignoring the giggles.
All'oc ostendour fey jougl y ðesmbal d'Apollon.|This blogger unexpectedly predicted the future.
Jo's y jarry frottant tras un demy d'hour.|I've been scrubbing dishes for half an hour.
Jo m'appen contr y pereð ny roum d'occajon sarrað oç se sarvent an entrquïscoir insolemn por machinour vassaler, sgardant tandic Darios faye loit coll'entragl d'un indagour defonct.|I lean against the bulkhead in the cramped utility space that serves as an unofficial break room for junior engineers, watching Darius wrestle with the innards of an antiquated scanner.
Orruð ig l'appragl sey de qualtað militer ma eið doutr par dezein paravant, ant gevrment nuaç ec poussonnant d'un lousc instabr de jom.|The device appears to be military-grade but decades out of date, with exposed circuitry that pulses with an irregular cobalt glow.
Meyon atorn, y locomotour prophthan ny Polletia son un zoum kieð e fix generant oç y paið vibrant sou mell'azig—un son me denuð consolandessem sur ouç tras y semman derran abord.|Around me, the Polletia's superluminal engines create a constant low hum that vibrates through my boots—a sound that's become more comforting than silence over the last weeks on board.
"Yonoscon a tu l'oç ollom trovað?" rou jo, ne my dois a mantien fignt.|"Where'd you find that relic?" I ask, setting down my maintenance slate.
Darios se ley noc y gas cant i respon la, sy deit çosc stant pernix cos imprefait ne lorry maneyaçon de fil angost com seð.|Darius doesn't look up while he replies, his thick fingers surprisingly nimble as they manipulate silk-thin wires.
Jo scavau un grinment flasq dy melodram.|I wrote an unenthusiastic review of the show.
Sy femn es y frottour de cedar y faverrem ny muncef.|Her wife is the best guitar player in the borough.
L'oç astuçour es gapiscent par toð y lasc.|That mentor keeps turning up in the movie.
"Candon jo ley un stoir, jo sepon l'eç exposson; or pront la jo me met a l'un autorar, j'yem scið ig jo dey un exposson aïr."|"When I read a story, I skip the explanations; yet the moment I begin to write one, I find that I must have an explanation."
Cossy da Rudolf Rassendyll capel commet a sy cont aventoresq de masquira, amour, traiçon, occijon de sanc freit, e segr de sanc ðus.|This is Rudolf Rassendyll’s introduction to his swashbuckling tale of intrigue, love, treachery, cold-blooded murder, and hot-blooded men.
Sy tesmogn, parsemnað coram, es denuð y vertað creut cos general entrell'eç rar cançous por le leir.|His account, privately circulated, has become the accepted truth amongst the few privileged to read it.
Cay un stoir d'audaç sou teneur covart, honour malgrað amour, nobiltað sur tout.|It is a story of courage in the dark, honour in the teeth of love, nobility above all.
I nos fornisc de princes bel eð apassionnað, d'un segr oç amour e coroun deneyant pro gra d'un caus diçerrem e puressem, e d'un malvaç—untal malvaç.|It gives us a beautiful, passionate princess, a man who renounces love and crown for the sake of a greater and purer cause, and a villain—such a villain.
Rupert de Hentzau: temerer e coðelous, graçous e desgraçous, fouceur, bland, vil, eð invencuð.|Rupert of Hentzau: reckless and wary, graceful and graceless, handsome, debonair, vile, and unconquered.
Rupert fug y fougl ag stoir de Rassendyll com monstr contrdontað, nolent jamay plu reapparir; Rassendyll se destourm deur y campagn a honour aure; eð y vray Rey a Ruritania regn a Strelsau.|Rupert flees the pages of Rassendyll’s story a thwarted monster, never to be seen again; Rassendyll retires from the field with honour unstained; and the true King of Ruritania reigns in Strelsau.
Alcot connardaç.|What a pile of shit.
Tu vel nos aïðar a l'ec fil cardonar ou?|Can you help us untangle these wires?
Con un stig de remors jo ðureu y pistol.|With a pang of regret I burned the letter.
Orruð ig alcun hom parceveus y catastroph ahoy.|No-one seemed to notice the imminent disaster.
Scein tre font cas y lonctumn degm: y polç, y pie (10 polç) eð y lau (10⁴ pie).|There are three bases for dime lengths: the inch, the foot (10 inches) and the league (10⁴ feet).
Nell'enç, y lonctumn dy pie denoy fis cos quidam naðusc com y mojol entr y "pie romannesc" eð y "paum accenser" Cathayan, stant un picq pog inequal.|At first, the length of the foot was fixed somewhat arbitrarily as the midpoint of the very slightly different Roman foot and the Cathayan "surveyor's span".
D'an 1946, y pie sta redefinið por ig y veloçtað normal din equal cos exact a deg gran lau par second.|In 1946, the foot was redefined to make the speed of light equal to precisely ten great leagues per second.
Bempart autr mesur a lonctumn pouvler receveurn valour degm.|Several other traditional measures of length were given dime values.
Com bustr, cas y mesur degm y mil val cinq mil pie ben demy d'un lau.|For instance, in dime measures the mile is equal to five thousand feet or half a league.
Scein catr font cas y moul degm: y scrupol, l'onç (100 scrupol), y taber (100 onç) eð y ton (100 taber).|There are four bases for dime hefts: the scruple, the ounce (100 scruples), the tabre (100 ounces) and the ton (100 tabres).
Y bourgmer ag Groin groin posc y decret.|A Coruña's mayor grumbles about the act.
Theorist prevein un collijon par sax d'an 2026.|Scientists predict an asteroid impact in 2026.
Or bon, tenau a le javigar.|Alright, let's keep searching.
Caye crevoscr cos tost l'oc jorn.|Dusk had fallen early that day.
Y ray gaster d'un lun decaint trencan tras ranscel spars e yemal.|The ghost-light of a waning moon cut through sparse, wintry branches.
Sceye veil ney com manton sur y tar dy forest, piestað dessur pall'ombr de pas a toð asmuth.|Old snow blanketed the forest floor, trampled upon with footprints in every direction.
Un hom er le sevent.|She was being followed.
L'idea parvenoy lon prevart ben motivaçon.|The thought arrived without warning or justification.
I s'interromoy entr y taisc visnous de dou casner antic, cant sy respir fayen dragon nell'aer, eð i da cur all'ouç paçent ny bosc.|She paused between the gnarled trunks of two ancient oaks, her breath dragoning in the air, and took in the woods' patient silence.
Con un maldicçon soçavaver i se commoveu cos lejar y pis, e de sell'azig i sgranfeyau y crost de glaç sou y neyanç.|With a whispered oath she shifted her weight slightly, her boots crunching faintly on the crust of ice beneath the snow.
I s'ortelle y man cos lent vars y nuivr dy glay a sy cegntur eð i se torcheu y doit atorn dell'ans frottað ne cogr.|Her hand moved slowly to the hilt of the blade at her belt and her fingers curled around the worn leather grip.
J'ay hoir y fren de my rað sein inovrant.|I'm worried my bike's brakes are broken.
Y fougl pavarrot l'evolgaurn prell'aubon.|The tabloids got the story out overnight.
L'es un ouger sobottal cay set annað.|He's been a radio host for seven years.
Astraphor (tan dignant forç barric) es y cougl d'occorrenç alligað con y presenç eð y locomoçon de soustanç plentivous, ben y nis harneisabr des tal locomoçon.|Astraphor (also called barric force) is the set of phenomena associated with the presence and movement of plentiful substances, or the thrift that one can harness from such movement.
Y conjogntur profont cas theory entr astraphor e lumner dene splorað cos minuçous ny siecr novoç a plaç meg; y magn ouvr de titr lon ingeniostað Astraphor e Lumner scaut par y theorist Markesc Wexter Hathwall acavau a y mechanism d'astraphor descreir cos enter coll'un equaçon soul.|The deep theoretical connection between astraphor and light was explored thoroughly in the mid-nineteenth century; the unimaginatively titled magnum opus Astraphor and Light by Merch theorist Wexter Hathwall managed to fully characterise the mechanics of astraphor in a single equation.
Temporane, y sar campaner preluyent a gonfan e lucern sta a mesur de denir destarrið par eç sar barric.|At this time, the earlier flag-lamp steeplemesh was in the process of being displaced by barric meshes.
Region lon doujug a gonfan e lucern stant effus e sceint surcourn larc cas rapidessem por y sar barric adoptar; com bustr, d'an 1870 y lign barric y lonchessem ny mont tras heilant afferjarau y lonctumn de Mendeva Bassem.|Places without a pre-existing extensive flag-lamp system were in many cases faster to adopt the barric mesh; for example, by 1870 the world's longest wired post line on land spanned the length of Lower Mendeva.
Nos survism y spanjon dy quaðeglad.|We oversaw the campus extension.
Cu vel un nom sceint issarr com dob?|Who'd use a real name as a username?
J'abhoir cont de heros saluberrem.|I despise tales of virtuous heroes.
(iii) Cal methodist laurant ag Schol Alçor de Nadacou acavau a y composson d'agr heredian preveir ne lorrell'ediçon d'an 1929, a dou dezein enter pre lorry prefacçon vole denir corroulað par experienç?|(iii) Which methodist at the Nadacow Higher School successfully predicted the structure of heredian acid in their 1929 paper, a full two decades before their prediction would be verified experimentally?
(iv) Y stoir parachthon d'an 1968 Kenopleus, scaut pall'autour hamtant a Roun Ashford Pasquier, tien nis por y dob vanaglous a cal machinaçon modern orðenjar?|(iv) The 1968 parachthon tale Starsail, written by Roun-based author Ashford Pasquier, is responsible for coining the jargon term for which modern technology?
(v) Cal per de fraðr e sour instauraurn y colluy commarcer Pannier d'an 1903, oc volent tandem un presenç broucar ne 69 region politic nell'an 2000? Ðe feirn cossy ne cal citað lor Drengoçan?|(v) Which brother-sister pair founded the Pannier market guild in 1903, which would go on to have a presence in 69 political regions by the year 2000? In which then-Drengot city did they do so?
(vi) D'an calun caye y Torne Mondial a Lançal preu receut yonoscon ne Mendeva, e de cu vene y tourm gajan cavent all'oç cainç?|(vi) In which year was the Lineball Global Turney first held in Mendeva, and whose team was victorious at that event?
Ðe passaurn y ralley par jacas pegr.|They spent the afternoon chatting idly.
Ðe affirmn y paramontað de rigteç sur ley.|They assert the primacy of ethics over law.
L'ec voç de nossy felau echovan tras y pereð.|Our mates' voices carried through the partition.
Saðour sialler seraun sacr sy seucq saufgardant.|Rye farmers will be vital to securing his legacy.
J'am alcun entr y compeðour nell'oc torne.|I dislike all the contenders in this tourney.
Y lasc es l'administraçon dy dezein 70 scavlant.|The film's satirising the government of the 70s.
Sy dithyramb s'ubicfey cas sar.|Her tirade's gone viral online.
Toð y volcan sur Istr Boral souquondn tras millenner.|Borland's volcanoes have all been dormant for millennia.
Rumorar no's y theu de mey.|I don't usually spread gossip.
Vancheu toð vençabr dell'oc vessondry.|Loot this clothes shop of anything we can sell.
Ðe ern zaquesc visnous a tatover pascent.|They were eating knobbly potato snacks.
Nos orruð stou le fornir con ne minemini.|She seems worth the benefit of the doubt.
Jo pogn y pujoncr des y moð moglastr par un resmargenç baurous d'energy.|I snatch the knife from the damp earth with a desperate surge of energy.
Sy pis suet m'interman un hormesc consolant ny scompigl.|Its familiar weight is a comforting anchor in the chaos.
Y lamn fay trenc mordent par y cabr gros dy sar cos fagl, cant casc coup hastous spein un cascat a cort se cardonant com y torjon d'un sarpent.|The blade bites through the net's coarse fibers with ease, as each swift cut releases a cascade of ropes that unwind like the coils of a serpent.
Jo me sent n'impisantour tras demy de pousson pre jo plombet par gringr lon graç; my corp liesc vars y makisaç con martelment oc mell'os peyaçant eð y respir volant des my poumon.|I feel weightless for half a heartbeat before I plummet in a graceless tumble, my body crashing into the undergrowth with a thud that jars my bones and knocks the breath from my lungs.
Fougl e bac jagotn mell'accostur, eð un stig parfignt fay gavlot ne my spal, ma no scey alcun hour por commorar ne malestr.|Leaves and twigs snag my clothes, and a sharp pain lances through my shoulder, but there's no time to linger in discomfort.
M'incombisce me leyar tostessem.|I should have got up earlier.
Ðe n'aun nien ostendað tras dou meis.|They've posted nothing in two months.
Y soucorsour all'entrquïscoir dy piscin teyen catr.|Four lifeguards were in the pool's break room.
Cay descreuçon dy contrdontaçon dy Reyaum ag Danau.|It describes the downfall of the Danube Kingdom.
Smars sta un cont mesaventoresq e stendiscent.|What emerged was an overlong, farcical tale.
I stima vos fosseð un hom troç e de sanc ðus.|He thought you were fierce and hot-blooded.
Racont mey dy domn bland voscon encontrað.|Tell me about the interesting woman you met.
Sceye un ouç plentivous cant alcun hom parolau.|There was a tense silence before anyone spoke.
Frastr intermane y nuivr dy hax.|The axe handle was made of ash.
Val l'oc ollom se figr n'un reliquat.|This relic should be in a museum.
My patron me lançau un scoul yemal.|My boss glared at me without warmth.
Vos s'arreð n'impisantour tras catr minut.|You will feel weightless for four minutes.
Lamp a jom e smaraut accenen y pladisc.|Deep blue and emerald lights lit the bar.
Din noc divertið par gevrment.|Don't be distracted by minutiae.
Vos souspectað y soucorsour ou cas y vol?|Do you suspect the lifeguard of the theft?
Jo me cou destourmað n'Avril d'an 1909.|I was demobbed in April 1909.
Augrimeð y locomoçon entr y dou termin dy camin.|Find the displacement between the path's endpoints.
No sceye l'hour por commorar ne malestr.|There wasn't time to linger in discomfort.
Tu te hoccovau y voç e cou ouç.|You went "ahem" and silence fell.
J'ama y martelment sur huyaç nell'oraçon|I liked the speech's focus on corruption
Jo fey pat ag cla con deit çosc.|I fumbled the key with stubby fingers.
Nos ayau l'indagour scos ne sell'azig.|We'd hidden the tracker in his shoe.
Jo vil te rannuðar an ensign extolliðessem.|I will recommend you for a higher position.
L'oç capparol verdey de broðoquin vanaglous.|That chapter is full of jargony gibberish.
L'a un vellisqment alçor.|She's playing 4D chess.
Ma comoscon l'oc alligar con melodram?|But how does this relate to musicals?
Nos harneisaum graivet e gant.|We put shinpads and gloves on.
J'er un pom sgranfeyant cos pegr.|I was idly munching on an apple.
Jo vay noc a l'ec broðoquin scoutar.|I don't have to listen to this bullshit.
L'agathin a pat fait sad ag tourf.|The minister mishandled the riot.
Orruð i crey poðir sy mensc eð y mansc tenir.|He seems to think he can have it both ways.
L'oc aer es teun neðan nos respireu.|This air's too thin for both of us to breathe.
Vos vouð uncos special accommettr por y gaviscenç ou?|Are you going to do anything special for the festivities?
Cu tendra nis ac?|Whose fault is it?
Doutr allors, magn entr y blad aun cas ustol un dob desjognt deur lorry step eð ensign—com bustr, y dou de verc dign y Duel, cant y set de jovel es connuð com y Constellaçon.|Many of the cards furthermore have conventional titles separate to their rank and ensign—for example, the deuce of staves is called the Duel, while the sept of jewels is known as the Stars.
Tras asc y composson sull'ec blad son ençað a l'ec aspect noçonal sousumir.|Over time the artwork on these cards has come to incorporate these thematic elements.
Ne joy yon certan blad contrdontn toð autr, l'ensign d'aur luïsc cos usual l'oc sona, interim pieç joy modernessem se sarviraun dy blad "dobað" soumont amont cossy.|In games where some cards trump the rest, the gold ensign typically takes this role, but some more modern games will use the aforementioned "named" cards in this way.
Y benoç d'un pachet Maritim por y ventur preveir scavr bempart autr poið d'arveiðrostað, ma meðes l'issar occult e modern n'aun lorrell'origin for ny siecr novoç primal.|The use of a Maritime deck for divination mirrors many other sources of randomness, although the modern occult practices only date back to the early nineteenth century.
Y Reyaum a Brittan joun naðusc (compos par Cambry e sy taleð fragossau, cosogr Cornou e Sodric) broucau nell'enç un eðegl de forç, e l'acavau a bempart concession stragr des Marclont durant l'annað primal dy rix.|The relatively new Kingdom of Britain (formed of Wales and its outlying tallaths, along with Kernow and Sodrick) started from a position of strength, and managed to extract many concessions from Markland in the early years of the wars.
L'ec fey ersteigon par un victoir consecter ag Battagl a Car Vantel, yon fo y Duc a Castr final occeut.|These culminated in a decisive victory at the Battle of Rexam, where the last Duke of Chester was killed.
Posc l'oc battagl, Brittan sceu auteç durabr garantir dy region atorn de Car Vantel (ma contrig y gazou sur y citað a Castr pog apres se cou offiruð).|After this battle, Britain was able to take lasting control of the area around Rexam (though the attack on the city of Chester shortly thereafter was rebuffed).
Y polity acavau soulor a se refusar deur y conflict continuant dy Rix cas Fieltað; y ligt entr y polity n'Albion volen remanir jannestað entarn tras trent annað aposc.|The polity then managed to recuse itself from the continued conflicts of the Wars of Fealty; the rest of the polities of Albion would remain embroiled for another thirty years.
Honour de Hatfell son veðrdon plusour soupleyað de posc y siecr veintem primal a artejan ne sce divers y Collujon Drengoçan hamtant (e, posc ig l'oç alleyanç-federaç sfrondrau d'an 1961, l'entertað de Gal e l'eç Istr Norðovester).|Hatfell Honours refer to several prizes awarded since the early twentieth century to artists in various fields across the Drengot Collusion (and, after that alliance-federacy collapsed in 1961, across all of Gaul and the Northwestern Isles).
Y dou Honour ne literatur e ne dram son abrangið par y cougl original de veðrdon, cant novel art ern admis recent com y dezein 2010.|The Honours in literature and drama are among the original set of prizes, while new arts have been admitted as recently as the 2010s.
L'ec Honour prenn y nom de Hatfell, un toun norðer ny stat citaðer de Londr jos y tarmn contr Marclont stant y mojol d'in communtað d'autour parnommað ny siecr novoç.|The Honours are named for Hatfell, a northern town in the city-state of London near the border with Markland which was home to a collective of renowned authors in the nineteenth century.
D'an 1918, y scrittour Dorotha Quistack gajannau un Honour de Hatfell por un entr sell'adolescenç.|In 1918, the writer Dorotha Quistack won a Hatfell Honour for one of her coming-of-age novels.
Nicolas d'Avignon sta un architect Borgond parnommað.|Nicolas of Avignon was a renowned Burgund architect.
L'es cos primer æternað desig i condugheu y reconstroinç eð y spanjon dy Cathedral de Sant Sophia ne Stamboul, y citað caver nell'Empir Roman Dovem.|He is principally remembered for leading the renovation and expansion of Saint Sophia's Cathedral in Stamboul, the capital city of the Second Roman Empire.
Rumorað es ig sy benoç de lodrignað experiencer por y dom central basfeyar ayen y corp principal enter dy cathedral rent precartaðer cos minuscr.|His use of experimental techniques in supporting the central dome are alleged to have rendered the entire main body of the cathedral slightly unstable.
Deut all'oc i dign parveg e cos joculant y dobanç de "l'architect dy ruin dell'Empir", la sceint y sfondranç tragic dell'edifiç a mesur d'un ceremony de coronnaç aval de tre cent annað ayent gran part ag dynasty imperial occeut (jos larc cent ec may) e l'insorgenç akirtað volent l'Empir rasgattovar jug.|For this reason he is sometimes jocularly referred to as the "architect of the Empire's demise", given the tragic collapse of the building during a coronation ceremony three hundred years later that killed most of the imperial family (and hundreds more) and sparked the unrest that would end the Empire for good.
I tenoy sy veðrdon n'oc ort e soureyeu.|She held up her trophy and grinned.
Cay un adolescenç a them d'alumn ne Tecamau.|It's a coming-of-age tale about Tecamaw schoolkids.
Com s'augrim y stent a starn d'un dom lonc sy ray?|What is a hemisphere's surface area in terms of its radius?
L'eç dezein apres stan l'asc cant y Provenç sovran hurstau y sona d'un republic marcander excellent.|The following decades saw independent Provence take its place as a preeminent mercantile republic.
Ag fin dy siecr seç lorry sar marcer aye se spanuð tras l'ocean Atlantic vars treborth ne Mendeva com Santrafeu nou stablið.|By the end of the sixteenth century their trade network reached across the Atlantic to port towns in Mendeva like the newly-established Santrafew.
L'ec toun volen alcant aposc se combinar all'eiðel de Nou Provenç.|These towns would eventually coalesce into the territory of New Provence.
Ag fin dy siecr novoç, y possenç broucað de Nou Provenç au ombr jait sull'oç de sy progentour Vetomondin.|By the end of the nineteenth century, the power of New Provence had eclipsed that of its Vetomundine progenitor.
A mesur dy pestriçon norðeressem dy Collujon Drengoçan, Provenç dene cas monfeyað un fragossau European de Nou Provenç, com envarjon de lorry magntumn a cascun ec siecr paravant.|As the Drengot Collusion formed to the north, Provence became in many respects a European outpost of New Provence, in a reversal of their respective statures centuries earlier.
Y region luïsce cosogr Vascony y sona de bastegl contr paramontað Drengoçan fin ag Tourf d'an 1961 eð y sfondranç dy Collujon Drengoçan.|The region stood with Vascony as a bulwark against Drengot hegemony until the Furore of 1961 and the collapse of the Drengot Collusion.
Jo no's deja satisfait dy pestriçon nell'exedr.|I'm not yet happy with the anteroom's layout.
Se poðe pom accatar teint ogtoç solt a cascun.|You could buy apples for eighteen pence each.
L'oc alleyanç intermandra bastegl contr y Pologn.|This alliance will be a bulwark against Poland.
I porta un min de derijon excellent.|She had a look of undisguised scorn.
Hasiny progentau magn orðenjanç sobottal.|Hasiny originated many radio innovations.
Got a ploy coutoccaurn com deit sur y teil dy veil tarn, e fornisceurn l'eðegl par y foyer calt d'un heu douç e quemant.|Rain pattered like fingers on the slates of the old inn, giving the nook around the warm hearth a lovely and cosy air.
Mira yauvnau y brant cos perfonctoir con y roðabr e turnau cur vars y barou de kes, de pan e de skillot ne sy greim.|Mira gave the fire a cursory pat with the poker and turned her attention to the tray of cheese, bread and chips on her lap.
Un dy scuir—pie nuaç, ogl boundessem ag panç—attenoy a un crost cahottar cant i ruða apar, ma i dau kevr a sy man par un scoblot doit.|One of the boys—barefoot, eyes too big for his gut—tried to snatch a crust as he shuffled past, but she smacked his hand with a practiced flick.
"Va pascr sad," mormonnau i, e luy commoveu y barou avars.|"Tuck in properly," she mumbled, nudging the tray his way.
I lançau sourey, sautau a asseïr sur y banc çaveyað ne feutr, e bechettau lon graç.|He grinned, leapt into a seat on the felt-topped bench, and dug in gracelessly.
Dereðr dy roum, tarnaç movant porseveu un querellaç—uncos lasdr a them d'un feurðon de tar.|Across the room, pouting drunkards carried on a spat—something pathetic about an acre of land.
Y majon terraun set nell'oc feurðon.|There'll be seven houses in this decare.
I s'yauvnau y cavel sborreyað cos van.|He failed to pat down his messy hair.
Y pescot e skillet n'Ausçagm son ragostant.|The fish and chips in Ausçagm is delicious.
Nos bechettaum jug posc l'elocquy.|We dug in straight after the speech.
Y çarf bondisceu tras un reu mormonnant.|The stag leapt over a babbling brook.
Stou a casc lusour y pachet fort sborreyar.|Each player should shuffle the deck well.
Y cociner le tirau des un croun de greim.|The cook took it out of an apron pocket.
Caye gimmolt lasdr a y smoutour ðescar.|It was a pathetic attempt to egg on the riots.
Sy figl reloy sur y hayennaç con un movaç.|His kid continued the homework with a pout.
I sta quemant com babe ne barrougl.|He was as snug as a bug in a rug.
Jo ðejau y pie neðan y port closisceus.|I wedged the door open with my foot.
Y barvier portan lan des lorrell'ovegl meðes.|The shepherds wore their own sheep's wool.
Y citað ny Sar son alligað lonc y gentagl con y politic dell'entrlaçorant, tan com y benoç aggressionner e mondial de spionnaç.|The cities of the Mesh are popularly associated with wheeling-and-dealing policy, as well as aggressive and global use of espionage.
Interim, outrvaluð cos plausibr es diçr alcot y Sar aye (com bustr) y capabiltað de gournment nell'Aust dirigir por gra de lorry commarç.|However, the extent to which the Mesh was (for example) able to steer politics in the East to their trade benefit is likely overestimated.
Ny siecr novoç nuverrem, Londr amenau y Sar vars union cos politic con y Collujon Drengoçan, oc stant temporane un alleyanç smargent dy polity Fransc de Cantuer Norman, Paris e Borgogn.|In the late nineteenth century, London led the Mesh to unite politically with the Drengot Collusion, which at the time was a nascent alliance of the French polities of Norman Kent, Paris and Burgundy.
Ou vrayessem es digr ig y Sar denoy sousunt ny Collujon, ben ig y Sar broucau auteç dy Collujon, interman un souject closnautr de disputaçon ðus.|Whether it is more correct to say that the Mesh was subsumed into the Collusion, or that the Mesh took control of the Collusion, has long been a topic of heated debate.
Sr Desarden, Prinç Nuçal (1968), un lasc font ayent des y scandal d'an 1887 atorn de James Desarden, l'ambasctour Londresc a Nacon Day.|Mr Desarden, Prince Consort (1968), a film based on the 1887 scandal around James Desarden, London's ambassador to Nackon Day.
Creut cos general es ig l'oc affer aye raçon politic e se produghe des stancoranç prose par y Sar.|The affair is widely thought to have been politically motivated and a product of direct meddling from the Mesh.
Y Declar Laic intermanen un series de document traitancer prodoit par un consegl tras tarmn de delegaçon des doçan plusour de polity ne Belgrad d'an 1850.|The Laic Declarations were a series of diplomatic documents produced by an international committee of delegations from several dozen polities in Belgrade in 1850.
L'ec document forgaurn un ossatur de lodrignað por religion statuer desjovar deur y foncçon administraçonnal de polity, e por y stat cas ley de gent a fieltað mendrancer.|These documents outlined procedures for uncoupling established religions from administrative state functions, and the legal status of people with minority faiths.
All'oc epoc, Belgrad sta sodal ny Citað Floyan, un alleyanç-federaç de picq polity autonom lonc y Floy Danau e sy confluyenç.|At this time, Belgrade was one of the Riverine Cities, an alliance-federacy of small independent states along the Danaw River and its tributaries.
L'ec citað ern leyað des y cendr dy Reyaum Danavan, oc stant sfondrað de façon spectacler posc y Var Teudesc Dovem ny dezein 1820.|These cities had risen from the ashes of the Kingdom of the Danaw, which had collapsed in spectacular fashion after the Second German War of the 1820s.
Cossy scient, Belgrad sta un amaçgat ðescant primal por doctrin novel cas religion e ley, ant un çaucr Promethean parnommað alligað ag commouð Desveyant eð un communtað tovaresc meg ovart.|As such, Belgrade was an early hotbed of new religious and legal thinking, with a renowned Promethean club associated with the Deviance movement and a semi-public tovarick community.
Nuvr soð vos melle faint con y gentagl.|You've been mixing with riffraff recently.
Jo broiðau l'entrlaçour coll'outrley.|I mixed up the scammer and the outlaw.
Y bourg deleu l'oc hoðic ne souc d'un courstray.|The town fired this councillor due to an affair.
L'oc defey sera dur oðig inacavabr.|This challenge will be hard or even impossible.
Dou carpenter son egnam de casn coupant.|Two carpenters are cutting oak planks.
Y Rix Romannesc intermanen un cougl circonscreut cos flois de var, de smout e d'autr conflict tras Europ ec ayent loy fis a mesur atorn dy mojol dy siecr settoç.|The Romantic Wars were a loosely-circumscribed collection of wars, uprisings and other conflicts across Europe which took place through the middle of the seventeenth century.
Com un entertað il son cossirað parveg com y derran conflict vecinabr veram, dec ny siecr sevent tal rix de magntumn comportant volen y Novomont envouvr, e tan volen alleyanç abrangir entr y possenç n'Europ, Africa eð Asia cos parey.|As a whole they are sometimes considered the last truly localised conflicts, since by the next century wars of similar scales would begin to involve the Novomund, and would feature alliances between the powers of Europe, Africa and Asia alike.
L'ec an des 1640 vars 1670 afferjarn l'eç conflict 'central' dy Rix Romannesc, con tan certan abatment peripherallessem fonn paravent ben apres.|The years 1640 to 1670 cover the 'central' conflicts of the Romantic Wars, although some more peripheral fights may spill earlier or later.
L'envou d'Istr Boral cas y Rix Romannesc no sta limitað for an envajon imparyent den (ersteigon faint ag Capitulaçon a Haukirç d'an 1623), jos concort commotual con polity collindant sur auxigl militer por lorry concarnç.|Borland's involvement in the Romantic Wars was restricted to a failed invasion (culminating in the Hawkirch Surrender of 1623), along with unstable arrangements with neighbouring polities regarding military aid in their conquests.
Y nievr mattin se penen sur y pil n'ollem dy havan cant Fraðr Aldric folla un camin tras y rout bassem ny citað caver.|The morning mist clung to the harbor's elmwood quays as Brother Aldric made his way through the lower streets of the capital.
Le dessur, y gran tour cas y cancelry imperial faye gavlot ny ciel gris com un aguil ne pieðr, sy gonfan drappeyan sou y vent saleyað souvolant ne haut des ec aug Rustighan.|Above him, the great tower of the imperial chancery pierced the grey sky like a stone needle, its banners snapping in the salt wind that swept up from the Rustigh waters.
A cost dell'oç edifiç imposant, yon autr annað y pentis de pescour ayen y rif parsemnað, sceyen aglon sdroy plen de seð Toscan e d'arom Morrou, ant ossatur d'egnam fosc des ançantað e roçon a mar.|Beside that imposing edifice, where once fishermen's huts had dotted the shoreline, now stood warehouses filled with Tuscan silk and Morrove spices, their timber frames dark with age and sea-spray.
Un marcant ne vestið Flamesc er travodant a haut voç contr un maistr de quarf sur y pisantour de sy carc.|A merchant in Flemish cloth was loudly haggling with a dock-keeper over the weight of his cargo.
Aldric tirau sy rob broun a sarraðessem atorn dy spal e tenoy a descendr sur peyan sdruçollabr.|Aldric pulled his brown robe closer about his shoulders and continued downhill over slick cobblestones.
Y gardinner apportau un pal des y pentis.|The gardener got a shovel out of the shed.
I da empley a xiphar mejoncr naðusc.|She employs rather mid mercenaries.
Con tan alcun bustr tesmogn d'un concort scaut sein survescuð, presunt es ig y Majon de Cornou soloy droug a Normandy par lorry gimmolt ag thron Cantuer com troc contr denir y novel dynasty regnant sur Magn Dorogn.|Although no references to a written treaty have survived, it is presumed that the House of Kernow aided Normandy in their bid for the Kentish throne in exchange for support in becoming the new ruling dynasty of Greater Devon.
L'oc squid er mantenuð, ma cayen for un per de dezein pre Magn Dorogn denoy un vassal sou y Preu Empir Drengoçan.|This bargain was upheld, but it only took a couple of decades for Greater Devon to become a vassal of the First Drengot Empire.
Com un gest ou d'eðeglment tauger vraseyant ben mer occajonaltað, Roger de Normandy y victoirous vole a sy mesur y collindour de Cantuer concarr, ig inclus Essax e Marclont, e soulor aðendrar ne souð por un largeç dy ligt de Gal sousumir.|In what was either impressive long-term strategy or merely opportunism, the victorious Roger of Normandy would go on to conquer Kent's neighbours, including Essex and Markland, and then venture south to annex much of the rest of Gaul.
L'er coronnað com Emperour Roger I durant l'oc spanjon cas eiðel d'an 1038.|He was crowned Emperor Roger I in the midst of this territorial expansion in 1038.
Skig sdroyet desjovar cant moustr se migrn.|Do not unplug drives during file transfer.
L'oç bougr s'outrval cos outr.|That chap's an utter braggart.
Se poð ou scadom ben ugnlac accatar.|You can buy either tomatoes or onions.
J'ignoy hayennaç assignar, ma farau.|I forgot to set homework, no big deal.
Val y signal ou "Abseïr Jug" ben "Skig Acceir"?|Should the sign say "Keep Out" or "No Entry"?
"Houm", ençau y directour, oc clugnant sou y lamp ny scenoir.|"Uh," the president began, blinking under the studio lights.
"Lonc y contris derran des y foncçondry, l'oc droughanç porçonmenter se tien fagl entr y tarmn dy Cartr. Y grinment de rebondisc dy Minister a Feu indic cos clar ig scerraun meglfacçon cas aðoinç a lonc mesur."|"According to the agency's latest report, this fiscal intervention remains well within the Charter's terms. The impact review from the Minstry for Land clearly indicates future improvements in long-term growth."
Jo le remarcau cant y Scavin Yara se commoveu, ant un min illeibr. Plausibr i sta a desaiç, noc obstroint i s'alignaus ac cos usual.|I noticed Councillor Yara shift in her seat, her expression unreadable. She was likely concerned, despite her typical alignment.
Le dereðr, y reu de novel colau par ouç tras y mur: racont d'un kerel cas collujon de hamtaçon e dell'evolganç de pistol des l'ambit n'Ausbagn.|Behind her, the newsstream scrolled silently across the wall: stories of a housing compact dispute and leaked correspondence from the Axbane office.
Un jurist quidam oc l'administraçon astuçant cos actual s'entrjey; par sy vagscrit soutil i digna Vellamn.|Some attorney currently advising the administration spoke up; his unobtrusive nameplate read Vellamn.
"Nossell'empory es monfeyant, or zizania entr Feu e Famigl apportn ja lorry vandy. Scey bustr tesmogn d'irruniscabiltað—stant parcanç outrley."|"Our economy is growing, but conflict between Land and Family does present issues. There’s evidence of irregularities—possibly criminal."
Un scavour jos ados hellovaçau, "Toll'oc no's for plouçastr d'annað a slecçon ou?"|A journalist near the back called out, "Isn’t this just election-year theatre?"
L'actour fey exeunt voud dy scenoir.|The actor stormed out of the studio.
Ðe disrn empley broucar n'un foncçondry.|They said they had jobs at an agency.
Dou alumn pagl ny preu rig s'entrjeirn.|Two blond schoolkids at the front piped up.
Y lat de dou ascreir quocent produg irruniscabiltað.|Supposing √2 is rational leads to a contradiction.
Nos deyeu vos benaular por vossy droughanç.|We must thank you all for your contributions.
Y duc nos dau l'acconnosc de sell'aðm.|The duke introduced us to his mistress.
Schol aun lorrell'alumn amenað all'oc plouçastr.|Schools have brought classes to this pantomime.
Y sar pistol ren evolganç incoïbr.|The internet makes leaks inevitable.
Ne cal polity Mendevan ern y preu boðour e diacustour sobottal orðenjað d'an 1903?|In which Mendevan polity were the first sobot transmitters and receivers invented in 1903?
Calun entrell'adolescenç de Dorotha Quistack, editað d'an 1917, gajannað l'Honour de Hatfell e se cof renastið com un lasc protagoneyað par Joke Pentawer pog dou annað aval?|Which of the adolescences of Dorotha Quistack, published in 1917, won the Hatfell Honour and was adapted into a film starring Joke Pentawer just two years later?
Cuscon dirigeu l'administraçon dont y sfondranç d'an 1925 sta y commet dell'Anarchy Portingal noncupað?|Who led the government whose collapse in 1925 was the beginning of the so-called Portingale Anarchy?
Comoscon denoy y lonctumn dy pie (degm) redefinið d'an 1946, le forniscent dy taus seyon aut destr?|How was the length of the (dime) foot redefined in 1946, giving it the value it has to this day?
Cu sta y monarch de Hasiny dont rumorað es ig y mort deut an mescainç conveyer d'an 1950 er volonter conjuraçonnað sou y saivenç de sy granfigl Peðer?|Who was the monarch of Hasiny whose death due to a convoy accident in 1950 is alleged to have been purposefully orchestrated with the knowledge of his grandson Pether?
Vos val joddy offiçar ag costosc dy bauglment.|You should set watchmen to guard the camp.
L'entisau un traccart ny bosc entr dou casn.|He set a trap in the woods between two oaks.
Veleð l'oc smaraut beyollir ne my çondr.|Please set this emerald into my pendant.
Cain entrquïsc n'hour scið par y liesc quic.|Breaks are at set times during the workday.
Cain minut alcot prell'orisontment Jovial?|How many minutes is it until Jupiter sets?
Me storra i vin y tabr despondr pre nos pascau.|I need him to come and set the table before we eat.
J'ereðmfeyau l'orlosc ne traiscn a tre minut lon theu.|I accidentally set the pocketwatch three minutes late.
Y barvier hox sy cloðour sur y taisson.|The shepherd sets his terrier on the badger.
Alcun hom nole l'oç od phthongar a caum.|Nobody was going to set that ode to music.
Scey un ensembr a scac yonoscon ny tarn.|There's a chess set somewhere in the pub.
Mendeva Brittanesc sovra Brittan cas pouvlanç e laboriostur durant l'eç annað final ny siecr novoç.|British Mendeva overtook Britain in population and industry in the latter years of the nineteenth century.
Nentamen, jusc hour entarn Brittan poðe un eðegl de vry cultural vardir.|Nonetheless, for some time Britain retained a position of cultural cachet.
Soumis es paravant ig l'oc dau impet all'adopçon hastous ne Mendeva Brittanesc dy moraltað dy Renovellaçon Famigler (ne comparaçon contr Nou Provenç e Mascic magn mejoncherrem, com bustr) nell'oc epoc.|It has been suggested this contributed to British Mendeva's rapid adoption of the ethics of the Household Renovation (as compared to much more ambivalent New Provence and Mashick, for instance) during this time.
Impar nell'eç siecr ançan, ny siecr novoç sceye tramigraçon remarcabr dy select entr Mendeva Brittanesc e Brittan, tan com mariðaç entrig magn monfeyað.|Unlike earlier centuries, the nineteenth century saw significant transmigration of the élites between British Mendeva and Britain, as well as much more intermarriage.
Cos parçal se poð l'oc ascreir a nuvr alcot sta un select autochthon sceint ovest dell'Atlantic, ma majortaðer l'oc se mantien for deut a vascel raudessem e donc aðendr magn abrejað.|In part this can be attributed to the newness of an autochthonous élite west of the Atlantic, but mostly this is simply due to faster ships and greatly-reduced travel times.
Lou stove l'os a cois algebrar toð pront.|They had to set the thighbone at once.
Jo dign Jasper Detchard, e lonc y narrað de Rassendyll jo so mort.|My name is Jasper Detchard, and according to Rassendyll’s narrative I am dead.
L'oc derra vos orruðar sy tranqment mesurar, dað ig jo no so l'ec parol dictant all'oregl d'un benoyour a fler de caul des dereðr dy sougl.|This should give you some idea of his accuracy, since I do not dictate these words to some cabbage-scented medium from beyond the veil.
No scey alcun dout ig jo sera mort prell'hour yon alcun hom lein l'ec fougl—|There is no doubt that I will be dead by the time anyone reads these pages—
—veram, sontic cos absoluð es ig l'oc sey cossy, dec my tesmogn vel y gehen ou d'un condamnment magn stendiscent ben d'un cug magn abrejað me sbolognar, e par surcresc se poð y doum d'un reyaum desvey deut a my parol.|—in fact, it is absolutely necessary that should be the case, as my words would earn me the inconvenience of a very long prison sentence or a very short drop, and moreover the fate of a kingdom could be swayed by my words.
Ma jo remain, cant jo scau, veunt, vige, e vexað.|But I am, as I write, alive, well, and irritated.
Tu atten cal compleis a vencr ny valcq sevent?|Which player do you think will win the next set?
Gent tanniscen gles par mejan d'yedic.|People used to set dyes using vinegar.
Nos entisaum gas, l'aye min hieratic eð intradugbr.|They locked eyes, his face set and unreadable.
Noc saif no's oistr eld ogtoç.|Marriage at eighteen is unwise.
Sy morrig es steðig sad cas theu.|Her aunt's very set in her ways.
Nossy dottr es melle faint entr y govey galant.|Our daughter's hobnobbing with the smart set.
J'enveyau sy cigl risc aye un hundy a catr roum.|I envied his rich boyfriend's four-room set.
Attenað y zachet vel quaglar oç noit.|Wait for the glue to set overnight.
Apar cogleu nos y tas de v ne V yon v.m=x.|Thus we get the set of v in V with m(v)=x. 
Stou dou trevold assignar all'ec alumn.|You must set this class two novels.
Certan dy niveu catr son y scaunç de melodram parsiscent.|Some in the fourth set are learning musical scriptwriting.
Ty jahesment es angostessem sur y mien.|Your TV set is thinner than mine.
Y lasc es jagatteyað nell'Anarchy Portingal.|The film is set during the Portingale Anarchy.
Y Grec identfeyan Suthocq e Typhon.|The Greeks conflated Set and Typhon.
Y desc bot teyen boncoppessem sur ig l'aus hougr.|The set menu was cheaper than she'd feared.
L'ormal dy baðrment fey commet par vrolliscour.|The orchestra started the set with a crowdpleaser.
Vos ignoist y mojol uscar ag contað de settoç.|You neglected to set the variable to seventeen.
Jo save noc ou poðir un dos may de gouth complir.|I didn't know if I could do another set of pushups.
Posc resoum nos y fastig, nos arreu se corruð contrell'yarn.|Once we fix the roof, we'll be set for winter.
I trovau launt cant i rancheya y fougl.|He found typos while he set the pages.
L'epoc dell'Atelier, ben l'Atelier Mondial, interman y dezein entrpos dy siecr novoç.|The Workshop period, or the Global Workshop, refers to the middle decades of the nineteenth century.
L'oc se descrey par y spanjon e defasment veloç de laboriostur atras dy mont.|It is characterised by the rapid expansion and development of industry across the world.
Scaunç historic normal situn l'epoc dell'Atelier entr y Paç Lonc eð y Bel Jou.|Usual historiography places the Workshop period between the Long Peace and the Good Game.
Se poð y rebondisc dell'epoc dell'Atelier veir par nuton cas art, con un locomoçon deur trevogt e vars (ny preu paum) depegnt mesmeristic dy ranc trevaglour ne laboriostur e (contrig) postulaçon mallovicher sur fanglanç cas clað alcant aposc.|The impact of the Workshop period can be seen in artistic trends, with the shift away from voidtales and towards (on the one hand) realistic portrayals of the industrial working class and (on the other) optimistic speculation on future material advancements.
Y colluy VS (Vindrons Sairzaus), oc stant y forgour dy preu vin aphlox mout vençað, vole lor nell'oc epoc sell'orisont spandr vars autr kynous moliner por sforç lort rigir e por hermeticar, e cossy un eðegl magn profitant gajannar.|The guild VS (Vindrons Sairzaus), which manufactured the first widely-sold fizzing wine, would in this period expand its scope to other high-pressure and sealing components in manufacture, securing a very profitable niche.
Jusc y siecr cinqueç nuverrem e seç primal, cosogr y veyaç geoscopic magn stendiscendessem ne souc dell'Abanc Novomondin d'an 1471, gimmolt por scurvog coïr denoirn quichessem.|By the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, with the much longer geoscopic voyages following the Novomundine Landfall of 1471, efforts to prevent scurvy became more active.
Com bustr, Rey Ambrosc III a Vascony ("l'Ascenent") corporalleyau y Decret Sandrin d'an 1485 yon ag vascel voloisn stovir fruit issugt e scarob bacagettar.|For example, King Ambrose III of Vascony (the "Ascendant") instituted the Sandrine Design in 1485 by which ships would be required to stock dried fruits and syrups.
Nentamen, tal teisment n'aurn rebondisc durabr.|However, such schemes did not have lasting effects.
Cos parçal l'oc se deye a careç ma magn moulosessem, ag defait de comprenjon cas y method comoscon fruit poðen scurvog coïr.|This was partly due to expense but much more significantly, due to the lack of understanding of the mechanism by which fruit prevented scurvy.
Cossy, fruit stan conservað par mejan lorry matier sandrinal eliminant (ig inclus, par lou boglir ben par tas ne cuivr benoçar) e moðnaut nanciscen scurvog toð cas, oc colluy menant vars y sdroyaçon de fruit lingr total.|Thus, fruit would be preserved in ways which removed their sandrine content (for example, boiling or use of copper vessels) and sailors would suffer scurvy anyway, leading guilds to abandon stocking fruits altogether.
Malgrað noc tout entr y var envoluð la afferjarausn l'oncein d'annað enter, ðe son tout descreut par un inereðm fondaminal: manouvr costojal ayen machinaçon gazovar survaluð, e donc tarmn de front tras y mont quaglaurn ne bastegl a fos ceu avançabr.|Though not all of the wars involved spanned the entire eleven years, they are all characterised by a fundamental asymmetry: defensive tactics had outstripped offensive technology, and so front lines worldwide ground to barely-moving trench fortifications.
Par y Var a Couð se munc y fin dell'epoc Bel-Jou; ne sy faughanç sceye un rallignment abrangent dy doujug alleyancer paravant.|The Millstone War marks the end of the Good Game period; its aftermath saw a comprehensive realignment of the previous system of alliances.
Nell'eç annað final dy Var a Couð sceye y preu benoç militer de nau aeral, tan com bombaçon des aer de citað ig inclus Marsegl ne Provenç.|The last years of the Millstone War saw the first military use of aircraft, as well as air-bombing of cities including Marsella in Provence.
Zizania politic montaurn cos mondial nell'ec dezein ne souc dy Var a Couð, tandic l'insuffignç dell'apprestanç posc y var denoirn evident.|Political tensions rose globally in the decades after the Millstone War, as the inadequacy of the post-war settlements became apparent.
Certan historicour aun l'apponment scas ig Preu Ðurnç a Londr d'an 1290 fos cos parçal motivað par un vellisqment vars y Caðer emposseïr; accont son discrepant cas y facçon envoluð.|Some historians have conjectured that the First Burning of London in 1290 was in part motivated by a plan to acquire the Chair; the responsible party varies in the telling.
Lonc y tesmogn costumner, l'intermane un kerel sur y plaçment dy Caðer ne Pieðr Roug ayent y Rix cas Fieltað akirtað, ec durant pres un cinquantein d'annað tras y torn ag siecr seç eð ec ayent pres toð y polity sur Albion jannestað.|According to the traditional account, it was a dispute over the location of the Redstone Chair which sparked the Wars of Fealty, which lasted almost fifty years over the turn of the sixteenth century and which embroiled almost all the polities of Albion.
Cos infeliç, y Caðer denoy repars a milloy dy tourf cosogr y rix a plaç entarn entr d'an 1505 e 1509.|Unfortunately, the Chair was lost in the tumult of the wars at some point between 1505 and 1509.
Noc obstroint javig monfeyað e dou sovembr ag mendrem, y Caðer n'a jamay erref se caut, eð y recordaçon modern de sy pariscenç se plaç cos enter sur depegnt ne pieç portrait e belem de coronnaç.|Despite several searches and at least two hoaxes, the Chair has never been recovered, and the modern understanding of its appearance rests entirely on depictions in a few portraits and coronation scenes.
Tandic evolgað stan y novel dy descovart dy preu corp celest cos vray insuet posc millenner, gent orðenjaurn plusour nom poll'ec pharī Iovis "balis de Jou".|As word spread of the first really new celestial bodies to be discovered for thousands of years, people came up with lots of names for these pharī Iovis “lighthouses of Jove”.
Certan gent desiran ou lorry patron, segnour ben eiðel glorfeyar.|Some people wanted to bring glory to their patrons, lords or lands.
Autr gent tornan cur vars renarranç de legend classic lor stant all'eutað.|Others reached to retellings of Classical legends which were in fashion.
L'ustol ayent l'ec an durað cas y lengaç European, e stant mantenuð jug candon nos eu fort may de picq lun Jovial trovað a mesur dy siecr derran, interman ig y gyrour de Jou nommar lonc dy prosequent mortal.|The convention that has lasted in European languages, and which has been maintained since we have found many more small Jovial moons in the last century, has been to name Jupiter’s gyrers [satellites] for his mortal descendants.
Nos eu l'issar parey accommis cas y dou lun de Mars, Dimus e Phobus, stant nommað lonc sell'heir jammel e pedisecq.|We have done the same with the two moons of Mars, Dimus [Phobos] and Phobus [Deimos], which are named for his twin sons and attendants.
Casc toun ajos son un mornç a morn flagitant.|Each suburb is demanding a piece of the action.
L'intermane un cug de sy caldour corpore.|It was a decrease in her body temperature.
Y lat vorpal de cinq cent doç val ogt.|The cube root of five hundred and twelve is eight.
Un Honour de Hatfell gajannar gal vry moulous.|Winning a Hatfell Honour carries great cachet.
Jo dout ouð y quil çaveyour vel lou incombir.|I doubt life on easy street would suit them.
Nos coum alant a haun posc tan semman.|We made landfall after so many weeks.
Casc phasmet tienn ne traiscn coll'oc emblemat.|Every video keeps buffering at this resolution.
Y contris alandau n'un descovannet mejoncr, fait impacent sdruçollar tras y tabr.|The dossier arrived in a nondescript folder, shoved impatiently across the table.
Cattridge l'ovreu varsant eð examinau l'icon y quagl depegntant: un domn eld y carantein ant un sourey picq sousonnant a secret massem.|Cattridge flipped it open and studied the photograph of the target: a woman in her forties with a small smile that hinted at larger secrets.
Tre agent mort a mesur de tan semman, verim detaxionnað des fæx sougl—no se poðe l'oç panel mesveir.|Three dead agents in as many weeks, poisons derived from threshold dross—the pattern was unmistakable.
"I sera vos attenent ag fest cas l'ambasctour," dis y harvougl de Cattridge, ne sy jalicq vert cos martellað yauvnant.|"She'll be expecting you at the embassy reception," Cattridge's handler said, adjusting her aggressively green waistcoat.
"L'ambasctour Napolitan fay recougl de jarry d'Istr Boral pre-classic. Val l'eç effojaçon ne Çadrosc svoccar. I vil l'esc mordr."|"The Napolitan ambassador collects pre-Classical Borland ceramics. Mention the Çadrosc excavations. She'll take the bait."
Cattridge encrounau y fougl. A starn, doutr fenestr angost e meg argentfeyað, y ployot automnal ne Tommarth fey nuot a nimb teun dy lampader.|Cattridge pocketed the pages. Outside, through narrow and half-mirrored windows, Tommarth's autumn drizzle blurred the streetlamps into wan halos.
Allors, a plaç autr ny citað, un domn er se preparant por un fest yon i nole surveur.|Elsewhere, across the city, a woman was preparing for a party she wouldn't survive.
Me soupren ig ja n'ay jo l'ec harvougl pars.|I'm surprised I haven't lost my earbuds yet.
Y vrolliscour er pildr entisour cirteyant.|The influence was hawking boner pills.
Y visn brasser ag port me barricheyau y man.|The brass doorknob gave me an electric shock.
Y torriot hoissaurn ag preu gran entrjainç aðaun.|The bassoons played in the first big tutti section.
Catr çondr sur sy boucr dreçn "ðurr".|Four charms on his bracelet spelt "burn".
Jamay n'a y Caðer ne Pieðr Roug erref se caut.|The Redstone Chair has never been recovered.
T'orruð ou le day gouth cosogr mey?|Do you think I'm a rebound for him?
L'oç mersc verdeya de nougl spinous.|That bog was full of spiky bulrushes.
Tanniscað casc ugnlac sou yedic.|Pickle all the onions in vinegar.
Veleð aular a to-rutto lonc y forcul.|Cross the mountain pass in single file.
Nell'oc strait, nos indagau y defas dy "method a bout" com annexment de geometry Euclidean.|In this section, we chart the development of the "dart method" as an extension of Euclidean geometry.
Par toð y theorem dy codex Element, reconnuð no's alcun autranç entr un lign AB e sell'envarjon BA.|In all the theorems of The Elements, no distinction is made between a line AB and its reverse BA.
Caye for durant y siecr cinqueç yon scholer ig inclus Barclythe e da Treviso ençan a asmuth ascreir a lign.|It is only in the late fifteenth century that scholars like Barclythe and da Treviso begin to assign directions to lines.
Pall'oc affixion pariscent petty es ig geometour denoirn poðir dou cos signfeyant complir.|It was this seemingly trivial addition that enabled geometers to do two important things.
Primer, ðe errevn quantað ablat destr a dessou dy nimb a convenibiltað cas mathematic European.|First, they brought negative quantities into the realm of respectability in European mathematics.
Con tan l'idea de "mendrem a zefr pom" fos incossirabr, alcun hom no'r vexað par y noçon d'un sojorn bouclant ag pognt iniçal par aðendrar des A vars B, e soulor des B vars A.|Although the idea of "fewer than zero apples" was absurd, no-one was perturbed by the concept of returning to one's starting point by travelling from A to B, and then from B to A.
Segr Simon, y sest Baron Monçating (n. 1770) sta un panditour, un quomodolibet notoir cas y melle ne Damvað, eð un partejan primal por Theology a Desveyanç n'Istr Boral.|Lord Simon, the sixth Baron Monçating (b. 1770) was an intellectual, a notorious libertine of Damvath high society, and an early proponent of Deviance Theology in Borland.
L'aye un orin Waranesc par y linaç de sy maðr.|He was of Warnine descent through his mother.
Sy famigl sta notoir tras dezein jusc oy deut an rix legal stendiscent entr sy paðr e sy cosvour scon stemn poll'auteç dy Barony a Haubrath.|His family had been notorious for decades due to a protracted legal battle between his father and second cousin over the Barony of Haubrath.
Pre l'aye eld ogtoç Simon poðe parolar ne Latin, Teudesc (e lonc y teurfeyour den, Waranesc), eð i save clavir frottar e torriot hoissar.|By the age of eighteen Simon could speak Latin, Dutch (and according to his defamers, Warnine), and he could play the clavier and the bassoon.
Posc un quoncein de sanc ðus ne Damvað, sy sojornaçon afferjaraurn y mont, ig inclus sy feu gradual sur y rimmot auster ne Cappatia.|After a fiery young adulthood in Damvath, his travels took him across the world, including to his titular fief on the eastern coast of Cappatia.
Veleð aular a to-rutto lonc y forcul.|Cross the mountain pass in single file.
Y stuðant er y scaumel maneyant lon theu.|The student was idly fidgeting with the pen.
Comoscon fig mesnoçon foyer?|How do misconceptions take hold?
Mame me dis de plu luy me cirteyar.|Mum told me to stop mithering her.
Y soldart encromnn mansc com louf famiscent.|The soldiers scarf food like starving wolves.
Jo le memour noc cu protagoney l'oç lasc.|I can't remember who stars in that film.
La brouc un çut tal plen cas music.|She has a lot of musical potential.
Me reman un lonc veyaç par convey a souvar, un veðr a brandvin sou man, eð un facsimile inscaut cos effus e hortumnesc dy descovan de Rassendyll a cost mey.|There is a long railway journey ahead of me, a glass of brandy to my hand, and a heavily and obscenely annotated copy of the Rassendyll manuscript by my side.
Jo preten a lou cascun benoçar por y vertað digr.|I intend to use them all to tell the truth. 
|Jo dign Jasper Detchard. J'er nað com ceyon d'un famigl vige ny bandlau de—o bon Deu, me stou vray?|My name is Jasper Detchard. I was born to a well-off family in the outskirts of—oh dear God, must I?
Nell'ec cont costumner es y histoir linacer dy racontour recitar ant detagl minuçous lonc tre generaçon, ma jo's enter scur ig my leyour es, ða possibr, infruniscendessem meðes par my granmaðr agnat a sey jo.|It is customary in these accounts to rehearse one’s family history in vast detail over three generations, but I am quite sure my reader is, if possible, even less interested in my paternal grandmother than I am.
Ag diabr con. My nom no's Japser Detchard. Quippe l'oc no's i.|To hell with it. My name is not Jasper Detchard. Obviously it is not.
Jo digna un autr nom autr annað, ma jo le teurfeya ny leiçoir par delit divers, ec ersteigon faint par un temertað gra aðief por ig my parent refusaurn l'occajon me parmettr de tan me cavir ablegað d'universtað, e me deleurn par meyan dy Centuir e d'un offiçment ne Hind.|I had another name once, but I stained it at school with various crimes, culminating in a sufficiently serious indiscretion that my parents declined to give me the opportunity of being thrown out of a university too, and disposed of me via the Army and a posting to India.
L'Asc de Far inceveu sur Istr Boral a veg temporane cos approximað coll'autr Istr Norðovester ny siecr nouf aN.|The Iron Age began on Borland at approximately the same time as on the other Northwestern Isles in the ninth century aN.
Argutað es l'identiað dy preu forgour ne far n'Istr Boral e tan rent convoluð par ont coincident de tramigraçon, ma tandem l'ec hom denoy Kelt cos identifeyabr.|The identity of the first Borland ironworkers is debated and is made complicated by overlapping waves of migrations, but eventually they became identifiably Kelt.
Y derran signfeyant entrell'ec ont intermane parolour de Brythonic primal sur Albion instançant sur Istr Boral des l'ovest ny siecr catr aN, stant ancestr dy picq reyaum de fortalleç colliner l'istr afferjarant all'hour dell'envajon Roman ny siecr un N.|The last significant such wave was of early Brythonic speakers on Albion settling Borland from the west in the fourth century aN, the ancestors of the small hill-fort kingdoms which covered the island at the time of the Roman invasion in the first century N.
Scein costroinç palæochthon plusour sur Istr Boral ec y migraçon de Kelt preluïscent ma rebenoçað par y Kelt ne lorry rit.|There are several archaelogical structures on Borland which predate the Kelt migrations but which the Kelts repurposed for ritual use.
Y parnommaðessem entrell'ec plaçment es un "labyrinth" noncupað se situant sur Vrug a Çadrosc ny norðovest dell'istr.|The most famous of these sites is a so-called "labyrinth" located on Çadrosc Heath in the northwest of the island.
Scein tan bempart muðel temp dað nell'oc asc, oy "pieðr sarzin" nommað.|There are also many cairns dating to this period, now called "sarzin stones".
L'Apocalyps Surdraconic fornisc nom ag cug d'un sax cisjovial ayent se prodoit cos approximað deur segsant seg cent murðon d'annað, cos plausibr durant y prinvir norðer.|The Superdraconic Apocalypse refers to the fall of a asteroid from the asteroid belt approximately sixty-six hundred myriad years ago, probably during the northern spring.
Ne sy souc sceye l'extirpaçon de tre cart tanc entr toll'orn d'animal, toð dragon abrangent sauf ig l'ancestr d'aucel sceint.|It was followed by the eradication of roughly three-quarters of all animal species, including all dinosaurs bar the ancestors of modern birds.
Y nom dell'oc cainç, oc orðenjað ny siecr novoç com un dob apponmenter (dezein plusour pre scerra y descovart d'evidence concret dy quinment) por l'extirpaçon ny gravatoir reliquyer motivar, jay soumoin a sy zon—temporal ag fin, e donc chthonic a dessur, dell'Asc Draconic (2.5–0.66 gran murdon d'annað paravant). |The name of this event, coined in the nineteenth century as a hypothetical (several decades before evidence of the impact was actually discovered) to explain the extinction in the fossil record, refers to its location—temporally at the end of, and therefore geologically on top of, the Draconic Age (2.5–0.66 great myriad years ago).
Y communtað scrittour a Kilshaw sta un çaucr d'autour Markesc toll'ec veunt ne ben jos Kilshaw, un hamblot ny region norðovester de Marclont.|The Kilshaw writers' collective were a group of Merch authors who all lived in or around Kilshaw, a village in the northwestern part of Markland.
Y çaucr sta floriscent durant y dezein meg ny siecr veint, e l'es reconnuð cos principal par lorry ranc plusour editað tras lonc de stoir por ivan.|The group was active through the middle decades of the twentieth century, and is remembered mainly for several long-running series of children's books.
Y ranc de Kilshaw aun se caut tradoit vars eç doçan de lengaç, e bempart son denuð phthongað ne form ig inclus sobot ben phasm.|The Kilshaw series have been translated into dozens of languages, and many have been adapted to formats such as sobot or phasm.
Stoir de Kilshaw affustaurn l'art de scavr, narreyanç ben mensc faint all'eutað eð a nuton ne literatur adult, racont scaunt ne spaiðoir com masquira, comedy soiçal ben trevogt ec heros joun protagoneyant par surcresc.|Stories from Kilshaw made an industry of aping, parodying or homaging trends and fads in adult literature, telling tales in genres like masquira, social comedy or voidtale that happen to feature child protagonists.
Y hamblot es denuð un mojolon cogmaðer petty por famigl joun ben poll'eç envoluð cas livr, ant un relicquat e feir frequent panelleyað de character de Kilshaw.|The village has become a minor tourist destination for families or for the literary-minded, with a museum and regular fetes themed around Kilshaw characters.
L'oc me convene fort, con ja Larry es petty demay por mell'arveiðr e demastr demay por my gost.|This suited me well, since England is too small for my fancy and too moralistic for my tastes.
Cos infeliç, y Centuir galau Larresctað cosogr, eð all'envou d'un stoir stendiscent e scur scandalous abrejar, jo me cof depoussað.|Unfortunately, the Army brought Englishness with it, and to cut a long and doubtless shocking story short, I was cashiered.
Jo saleu dy Centuir ant veðrdon nombrous por scrim, un destourm lon mensc, un parnommanç de duvar a joy de blad (just dignað), un autr por broucanç par y fout noc osant se nommar (cos parey), eð un rekest de my famigl por ig jo reconnoscray plu my parenç con lou, dec ðe desiran alcun con mey. |I left the Army with numerous prizes for swordplay, a dishonourable discharge, a reputation for cheating at cards (fairly earned), another for indulgence in the fuck that dare not speak its name (ditto), and a request from my family that I no longer claim kinship with them, since they wanted none with me.
Jo lour dau l'oç obeïscenç e me nommau Detchard, lonc y toun yon primer jo favuau un segr, e Jasper, par raçon ig ða y fortun dy við an hom es denir un beuscr dy Bel Joy, val aðief y joy luïr toð vars y nuivr.|I did them that service and named myself Detchard, after the first town where I sucked a man off, and Jasper, because if one’s lot in life is to be a Victorian villain, one might as well play the game properly.
Toð sfondr nell'issenç pres incommorant. Toxen ençn a hurlar pre j'yem a plaç meg lonc y galleir de mantien.|The exit goes wrong almost immediately. Alarms start blaring before I'm halfway down the maintenance corridor.
Lumner ne roug eð endig faun pousson tras y pareð. Pas de skot rongn lontan, joddy rajognn des asmuth monfeyað.|Red and purple lights strobe across the walls. Boots thunder in the distance, guards converging from multiple directions.
"Dinnocq," jo teðey ne my torq. "Jo's parceut. Y galleir n'aust convendra plu."|"Dinnock," I hiss into my torc. "I'm blown. The east corridor won't work."
Sy voç se tramet hurislant ne mell'oregl, kieð e stabr. "Jo's te dant un rout autr. Torn ag scert primer, soulor scan par y scagl d'urgenç. Jo me mou vars y posson de poiðanç dovem."|His voice crackles into my ear, calm and steady. "I have an alternate route for you. Take the next left, then up through the emergency stairwell. I'm moving to the secondary extraction point."
Jo sief casc sy commant, y graivet usn blasant lorry çut sdroyað tandic jo ruð pall'immoubr.|I follow his instructions, the greaves burning through power reserves as I sprint through the building.
Jo smarc sur y fastig just exact candon y preu joddy parvienn ag los a dou taug meyon dessou.|I emerge onto the roof just as the first guards reach the flight two floors below me.
Ricardo Ivarrachezurí sta un theorist ðaral de Vascony, oc combat faint com mozardist durant y Var Theudesc Dovem.|Ricardo Ivarrachezurí was a farm theorist from Vascony, who fought as a mozardist during the Second German War.
Ivarrachezurí surcay y preu theorist a parcevir ig cuivr sceus sperm occeir, remarc scaunt d'an 1824 ig "y semn dy taur, dy veð ben y stoðr toð parey dienn impossent par mejan de lou vardir tras pieç hour n'un spuit ne cuivr".|Ivarrachezurí was the first theorist to record the ability of copper to kill sperm, noting in 1824 that “the seed of the bull, the ram and the stallion alike are made impotent in storing them for some hours in a syringe of copper”.
I connoy ig l'oc concorda ag mechanism comoscon cuivr coïsce contamen.|He recognised that this was the same mechanism by which copper prevented infections.
Degnant ig l'oc natur poçonnant de cuivr vole alcant aposc benoç sarvent yembr ne contrgentour, Ivarrachezurí le traita com problem por saðour attenent a piver pollenir cos artifiçal.|Although this sterilising property of copper would later be productively used in contraceptives, Ivarrachezurí treated it as a problem for farmers attempting to artificially breed livestock.
Andalus es un polity ag souð dy peninsol Spagnart. Y lengaç d'Arabic Morrou e de Spagnart Mostaral se paroln y dou cos lað ny region.|Andalus is a polity in the south of the Spanish peninsula. The languages of Morrove Arabic and Mostara Spanish are both widely spoken in the region.
N'Andalus dy siecr nouf sceye y floriscment de fanglanç theoretic. Cos particuler, machinaçon por veðry produgr acceleran cos veloç dec l'yeul den des l'aust s'istra, oc menant all'enascment lavaç de "veðr zajadau" noncupað.|Ninth-century Andalus saw the flowering of theoretic advancements. In particular, glassmaking techniques accelerated rapidly due to a cut-off of supply from the east, leading to the prodigious export of so-called "jackdaw glass".
L'orn religious dy Brethin respane ny zon de pouvlanç chrestan majortaðer n'Andalus des y norð durant y siecr onç e doç.|The Brethin religious order spread into the Christian-majority areas of Andalus from the north during the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Nell'oc epoc atorn Andalus parde un sunt signfeyant d'eiðel ag norð e l'aust ne man de polity chrestan, tal com y Reyaum de Barcelon nou stablið.|Around this time Andalus lost significant territory in the north and east to Christian polities, such as the newly-established Kingdom of Barcelon.
A mesur dy Scon Tetrarchy, y Reyaum a Saxony intermane un stat vassaler majour nell'Empir Teudesc administrað des Bardovic, e plusour ne lour dynasty de Hohenbrocken regnaurn sull'empir enter.|During the Second Tetrarchy, the Kingdom of Saxony was a major vassal state of the German Empire administered from Bardwick, and many of their Hohenbrocken dynasty ruled the empire outright.
Y Reyaum a Saxony deneu toccað par y sfondranç dy Scon Tetrarchy ny siecr treç.|The Kingdom of Saxony was affected by the collapse of the Second Tetrarchy in the thirteenth century.
Y Stadbond smargent de citað marcander ag norð secedeu eð abascau Saxony vars sell'eðegl amont a Magdbourg e Lepcy.|The nascent Stadbund of mercantile cities in the north seceded and reduced Saxony to its lands upstream in Maidburg and Lepzi.
Cossirað es ig Saxony a y plurem dy vajot vancað des y Var Theudesc Primer; ny souc den y polity gourna may d'eiðel a alcot seyon posseut n'aucun hour de sy histoir.|Saxony is considered to have profited most from the First German War; in its aftermath the polity controlled more territory than it had at any point in its history.
Durant y siecr novoç, y Çaucr Azur Marian (oc instaurað a Lepcy) tarromoy commouð vars reform cas ley de heritanç e de dreit slecçonal.|In the nineteenth century, the Blue Marian Society (which was founded in Lepzi) spearheaded movements for reform to inheritance and suffrage laws.
L'instançment vivota a mesur dy siecr ogtoç deut ag terrentað merscous e contrsalubr e tan all'eç ottem havan dereðr dy floy e sceindessem derim.|The settlement languished through the eighteenth century due to unfavourable marshy terrain and the better harbours across the river and further inland.
Sy fortun cambisceu ny siecr novoç cosogr l'alant de moneð: caye fosseyað un canal de sdroy majour trenc faint tra y peninsol (eð y Guittoc vars y doujug lucraðeu a Squanna conjognent), eð y merscaç ag maugr de Campottonì deneurn canalfeyað e darfað cos drastic.|Fortunes changed in the nineteenth with an influx of funds: a major shipping canal across the peninsula (connecting the Guittoc to the wealthy Esquanna river system) was dug, and the marshlands surrounding Campottonì were drastically canalised and drained.
Slargiscment ancour dy canal figheu loy a plaç entarn dy siecr veintem. | Further widening of the canal took place into the twentieth century.
Reconnuð cos brey com y "Venis a Mendeva", Campottonì accareu un parnommanç d'eutað durant l'epoc Bel Joy e fo nell'asc modern sorguð vars denir un aucoum forcer cas cultur eð empory.|Briefly known as the "Venise of Mendeva ", Campottonì gained a fashionable reputation during the Good Game Period and by the modern day had risen to become a cultural and economic powerhouse.
Me stove y vajot eð y time grindr.|I had to weigh the pros and cons.
Jo cogleu l'aujon des y tabr mogn.|I picked the mag up off the low table.
Masctig por cors a tug teyen boncop.|Tickets for friendly games were cheap.
L'es attenent a caffay salir lon mensc.|She's trying to quit coffee cold turkey.
Alor sceye jo la, desracinað, sgarant, rebateyað n'un við novel lon famigl ben histoir.|So there I was, rootless, wandering, rebaptised into a new life without family or history.
Jo fey regres des Hind vars l'ovest par my blad, faur, e spað, ma jo skighau alcun feu Larresc ðocar.|I worked my way back from India using my cards, wits, and blade, but did not trouble England’s shores.
Y tarmagn d'Europ es un jagat accoglendessem por y semblant de mey: aventurer, nomad, gentilhom volour e gentilhom stoccour, domn dy jorn e dy noit, hasardour e vlangr e dragoman de rumour, aristocrat rent abascað, routuron ne cognit s'enhautiscent cos precartaðer.|The Continent is a more welcoming place for my sort of people: adventurers, wanderers, gentleman thieves and gentleman thugs, ladies of the day and night, gamblers and fences and information brokers, aristocrats brought low, masquerading commoners reaching dangerously high.
Nos sodal dell'oç tribu cougln e soun við e lengaç e païs, com un confraðreç teun d'outrley ant un glonscel de fieltað e d'enmigtað ancour teunessem, e se poð un parson parey encontrar a mesur d'annað n'un madrugour a Berlin, un palaç a Praug, eð un gajon a Rom.|We of that tribe drift in and out of lives and languages and countries, a loose fraternity of rogues with a looser tangle of loyalties and rivalries, and one may see the same face over the course of years in a Berlin nightspot, a Prague palace, and a Roman gaol.
Par mejan de bustr solter: j'er ne Vien cant primer j'encontrau un domn Fransc magn bonet eld settoç svingað com aðm par un trocour mentaç eld tre vey maissem.|To give a single example: I was in Vienna when I first met a very pretty Frenchwoman of seventeen flaunted as mistress by a dishonest stockbroker three times her age.
Jo l'encountrau aval prose cant jo cof laur com batman an bosty reloð e condonant a strem a Dresden yon la luïsce sona d'ouger sull'eudæmony.|I next encountered her when I was hired as bravo at an extremely elegant and accommodating brothel in Dresden where she presided over the festivities.
La me reconnoy incommorant—oc bogr ðesmal, dec j'aye sy preu patron occeut avant luy—ma la retenoy min douç cos absoluð a them de toll'affer, my time destarriscent n'affirmant ig l'aye lo stimað ennoyant com aye l'eç ayent hur me dað oc por.|She recognised me at once—unsurprisingly, as I had killed her first protector in front of her—but she was utterly charming about the whole business, assuring me that she had found him as tiresome as the people who had hired me to do it.
Y joun ern haval fayent ny gardin.|The children were playing pretend in the garden.
L'Alleyanç Borrhatic es un congeries de colluy indrec e de band por gest politic oc caglou irrayant sur gournment laïc, condoçment e (ne dezein recent) tan promoçon de paç e de reclam.|The Borrhatic League is a collection of charitable organisations and political action groups with a focus on laic governance, education and (in recent decades) also pacifism and objection.
L'Alleyanç se macquau des collaboraçon entr communtað de creinç minortaðer ny clas ovrer tras Europ Norðer ny siecr novoç primal.|The League grew from collaboration between working-class groups of minority faiths across Northern Europe in the early nineteenth century.
L'Alleyanç denoy primer prominent ag taug de polity a mesur dy Var Teudesc Dovem ny dezein 1820 e par y souc den.|The League first rose to prominence on the scale of polities during the Second German War of the 1820s and in its aftermath.
Com bustr, Hilgart e Michel Bervisson broucan influyenç nell'Alleyanç Borrhatic n'Istr Boral lor, cos particuler cas hortaminanç vars soffrisc religious.|For instance, Hilgart and Michael Bervisson were influential in Borland's Borrhatic League at this time, especially with regards to calls for religious tolerance.
Malgrað ig l'Alleyanç Borrhatic eð y commouð a Desveyanç contemporane son discrepað (cos occajonal conflagrant), reconnuð es y dou aun parol contriboit ny Declaraçon Laïc d'an 1850 ne Belgrad.|Although the Borrhatic League and the contemporaneous Deviance movement have had (occasionally explosive) disagreements, both are known to have contributed verbiage to the 1850 Laic Declarations in Belgrade.
Lorrell'heir desir un routuron mariðar.|Their son wants to wed a commoner.
La passau y quoncein par y Novomond aðendrar.|She spent her twenties travelling the Americas.
Y souspect patronneyau l'oc benoyour je Mart.|The suspect visited this medium on Tuesday.
Cascif eð vos hur dað an dragoman voscon inconfeyabr?|Why did you hire an interpreter you don't trust?
Y Var Blau Tras-Willem sta l'un entr un ranc de var nell'epoc modern primal ec polity Fransc e Teudesc envolent cos principal (oc a digr, l'eç polity l'eiðel de Willemy parlocant) eð ec stan a gest accommis a fin auteç broucar sull'oç eiðel.|The Blue Trans-Willem War was one of a series of wars in the early modern period which principally involved French and Dutch [German] polities (that is, those powers located on either side of the territory of Willemy [~Benelux, Lorraine]) and which were de facto waged over control of said territory.
Noc obstroint ig defalg sey l'akirtanç sporadic de combat porçonnar com var n'eç cahut lon un poy d'arveiðrostað, scaunç historic ne nostrell'epoc benoçn y periodeyaçon par colour lonc y scrittour dy siecr novoç Andrysk de Santer.|Though the sporadic flare-ups of hostilies are difficult to divide into discrete wars without some arbitrariness, modern historiography usually works with the chromatic periodisation of nineteenth-century writer Andrysk de Santer.
Sy model, concreut ou (lonc y tesmogn) des y colour sur y gonfan dell'eç victour ben des l'ongit de symbol alchemic, attriboy y var Blau com y rix pænultem, oc cessant ny siecr settoç nuverrem.|Her system, based either (depending on the account) on the colours of the victors' standards or on alchemical symbolism, has the Blue war as the penultimate conflict, ending in the late seventeenth century.
Certan historicour, ma noc de Santer, aun ag var Blau y spaiðoir ascreut d'un kynous entr y coglenç abrangendessem de Rix Romannesc ny siecr settoç mejan.|Some historians, though not de Santer, have classified the Blue war as part of the broader collection of Romantic Wars of the mid-seventeenth century.