Text

Cay l'oc pengovin y provost dy çaucr por lengaç forgar!
I scout e compren fort lengaç foran.
I pas mout ec hour cas sar eð a prestig por noçon communeyar acas.
Sy flac aun comport all'eç de hivocin: no scerra alcun oundr de lou quinar.
L'oc pengovin forgau jaçol y lengaç l'ottem.
Y çaucr a ceu jamay untal provost memorabr.
Ðoreu y pengovin!

Context

Boral is a Romance language spoken on an island (Borland) in the North Sea, west of Denmark, about twice the land area of Wales. It exists within an alternate history setting which features a Roman province on Borland and which diverges significantly from our history over the 1500 years since the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.

Grammar

Boral is broadly SVO or V2; the word order of a sentence containing a simple verb is

> subject verb (object) (obliques)
> y domn caugtr y bal "the woman kicks the ball" df woman kick df ball

whereas for a compound verb (an auxiliary with a participle or infinitive) it is

> subject auxiliary (object) verb (obliques)
> y domn vil y bal caugtrar "the woman will kick the ball" df woman fut df ball kick-inf

The subject is mandatory, except for certain impersonal verbs. If the object is a pronoun, it always comes immediately before the main verb.

In the noun phrase, demonstratives and numerals precede the noun, while adjectives follow it. The particles oc, oç, ec and eç denote number and proximity (see Glossary), although for example "oc" (proximate singular) is used more than English would use "this".

Verbs are given in the infinitive form, ending in -ar, -ir or -r. The verb forms that appear in the text are:

> present singular: -∅
> present 3rd plural: -n
> past singular: -au
> future 3rd singular: -(r)ra
> subjunctive 1st plural: -eu

Impersonal copular constructions uniquely have a VS(O) syntax. These include sceir "for there to be":

> scein dou cat "there are two cats" there.be-3p 2 cat

and cair "(of environmental or general situations) to be":

> cay sol "it is sunny" fall sun
> cay je sell'osceyan "it is her birthday" fall day.of 3s.gn=birthday

Adjectives form comparatives with the suffix -essem (or occasionally -errem, and note ottem "better"), and superlative by adding a definite article.

Negative clauses are formed with the particle noc "not" after the verb, or (for copulas) with the particle no "not" before the verb.

> Jo pasc noc pan "I don't eat bread" 1s eat not bread
> Jo no so un scuir "I am not a boy" 1s not be.1s indf boy

Glossary
a - prp. to, at, of, than
a - v. have.3s; see aïr
acas - adv. at that person's home; in that particular context
aïr - v. have
alcun - adv. none, not any
all' - prp. to the; see a, l'
aun - v. have.3p; see aïr
cair - v. fall; happen, occur; (in statements of "general environmental facts") be
cas - prp. at the home of; in the context of
cas sar - adj., adv. online, on the Internet; see cas, sar
ceu - adv. basically, essentially, pretty much; barely, hardly, seldom 
communeyar - v. communicate, impart, pass on
comport - n. similarity, relationship
comprendr - v. understand, realise (stem compren-)
çaucr - n. society, club, guild, group
de - prp. of, from, belonging to
dy - prp. of the, from the; see de, y
ðorar - v. praise, worship, glorify
e - conj. and
ec - dem. plural proximate; these
eç - dem. plural distal; those
eð - conj. (before vowels) and; see e
flac - n. flake, scale, shaving
foran - adj. foreign, strange, unfamiliar, different
forgar - v. forge, make, create, smith, generate
fort - adv. well, really
hivocin - n. armadillo
hour - n. hour, time
i - prn. he, she, it
jaçol - adv. once, long ago, not recently
jamay - adv. never
l' - art. (before vowels) the; see y
lengaç - n. language
lou - prn. them
memorabr - adj. remarkable, notable
mout - adv. often
no - adv. no, (with copulas) not
noçon - n. notion, idea, opinion
oc - dem. singular proximate; this
ottem - adj. better, best
oundr - n. injury, wound, pain
passar - v. pass, go by, elapse, spend (time)
pengovin - n. pangolin
por - prp. for, in order to
prestig - n. nous, expertise, mastery, proficiency
provost - n. officer, prefect, commander; leader, person in charge
quinar - v. strike, whack, thump; collide with, bump into
sar - n. net, fishnet, network, mesh; Internet
sceir - v. for there to be; existential copula
scoutar - v. listen to
sy - prn. his, her, its
untal - det. somesuch, any
y - art. the