Boral is a Romance language spoken on an island in the North Sea, west of Denmark, about twice the land area of Wales.

Boral is broadly SVO or V2; the word order of a sentence containing a simple verb is

subject verb (object) (obliques),

whereas for a compound verb (an auxiliary with a participle or infinitive) it is

subject auxiliary (object) verb (obliques).

The subject is mandatory, except for certain impersonal verbs. If the object is a pronoun, it always comes immediately before the main verb.

In the noun phrase, demonstratives and numerals precede the noun, while adjectives follow it. The particles oc, ig, eç and ci denote number and proximity, although for example "oc" (proximal singular) is used more than English uses "this".

Verbs have two participles: a present participle in -nt, and a past participle usually in -ð. The verb forms that appear in the text are:
prs.sg: -∅
prs.3pl: -n
have.3s: a
be.3s: es
give.sg.sbj: day
present continuous: star "to be" + -nt participle
recent past: aïr "to have" + -ð participle

Relative clauses are formed as shown:
the man who loves me = "the man loving me" y segr m’amant
the man who I love = "the man loved by me" y segr meyon amað

The forms meaning "by X" are called the demoted pronouns.

The verb suffix -br produces an participle meaning "able to"; for example amar "to love", amabr "lovable". These can also take the demoted pronouns:
the man who I can love = "the man lovable by me" y segr m’amabr

The prepositions a, de and ne interact with a following definite article y to give ag, dy, ny.
The prepositions a, de, ne, sur, con, pre interact with a following definite article l' to give all', dell', nell', sull', coll', prell'.
The possessive pronouns my, sy interact with a following definite article l' to give mell', sell'.

The construction "ne + present participle" means "while Xing". Note that the direct abject of X still precedes X here:
n'un scadom pascent "while eating a tomato"

Comparatives are formed from adjectives with the suffix -essem:
grant "big" - grandessem "bigger"