Peoppaeq is not a natural language in-world, but a secret ritual language which grew out of a language
game, designed to disguise meaning from non-initiates. It lacks verbs (or has only a few, depending on
analysis), and also lacks a separate class of adjectives, which are morphologically identical to nouns. Every
main clause is the expression of two or more noun-phrase arguments linked by directional operators
which most resemble prepositions or noun-case markers:
a essive, locative, comitative X ‘is’, ‘is at/by/in/on’, or ‘is with’ Y ESS =
i allative X ‘is towards’ Y ALL >
u elative X ‘is from’ Y ELA <
The same three operators can be said to represent aspectual information, rather than spatial (though they
are still glossed as noun case markers). ’s- form’ operators carry tense information in a similar way:
Plain s- form (see below)
a continuous present X ‘is doing [the action of]’ Y
i prospective future X ‘is going to do [the action of]’ Y
u perfect past X ‘has done [the action of]’ Y
Translation into Peoppaeq requires significant reframing of perspective, focus and agency. In your
translation out of it, the same is likely to be true. Ambiguity is common, and context often carries a
significant semantic load. It’s still at an experimental stage of development, too. Good luck, be creative,
and please ask for any clarification.

Argument specification
Many argument noun phrases must be given a deeper level of specification than in languages which use
verbs. This is particularly true of animate agents, which are often drilled down to a body part with which
they perform the action. To illustrate, consider the following example:
‘A dog eats a bone.’
In English we have two arguments, ‘dog’ and ‘bone’. But in Peoppaeq, with such limited operations, we
cannot clearly convey the notion of ‘eating’ with these arguments:
Gloss Spatial interpretation Aspectual interpretation
dog ESS bone ‘a dog is with a bone’ ‘a dog has a bone’*
dog ALL bone ‘a dog is towards a bone’ ‘a dog is going to get a bone’
dog ELA bone ‘a dog is from a bone’ ‘a dog had a bone’
[*NB. ‘A dog is a bone’ would also be a correct translation; only logic and context steer us from this.]
We instead reframe the agent: we drill down our focus to the bit of the dog which is principally interacting
with the bone, the dog’s mouth. There are various possible ways of arranging our arguments and
operators, which each carry their own nuance:
mouth-dog ESS bone ‘a dog’s mouth is at a bone’ ‘a dog is eating a bone’
mouth-dog ALL bone ‘a dog’s mouth is towards a bone’ ‘a dog is eating / will eat a bone’
bone ALL mouth-dog ‘a bone is going into a dog’s mouth’ ‘a bone will be eaten by a dog’
etc...

We could choose a different argument specifier, such as ‘tooth’, ‘throat’, or ‘innards’, to convey ‘biting’,
‘swallowing’ or ‘digesting’. Another strategy is to further define the other argument:
dog ESS food-bone ‘a dog is with a food-stuff [made] of bone’ ‘a dog has a bone (which is food)’
This sentence might equally suggest ‘a dog is an edible skeleton’... Peoppaeq permits this ambiguity, but I
have generally tried to specify my arguments more deeply than this for this task, to help with clarity.

Topic and complement
The two arguments could be called subject and object, agent and patient, etc., but I use the terms
‘topic’ (the left-most argument) and ‘complement(s)’ (the other(s)). This reflects the fact that agency (who is
doing something) is eroded when a verb is not actually present.
The topic may be best translated as either a subject or object, depending on context. The key is to think of
the animacy level of the arguments, and the directionality at play, and assume the most obvious agency
which those factors imply. For instance, bones (when no longer attached to bodies!) are highly inanimate
and generally don’t ‘do’ anything — whereas dogs do. Hence the dog is a more obvious candidate for you
to translate as the subject of an active verb, even if semantic ambiguity exists.

Simple concatenation: compounding, collocation & copulation
Compounding
Two nouns can be compounded. The second is best thought of as a noun in the genitive, or a noun in an
adjectival role, adding further information to the first noun. There is a wide range of possible connotations
of the precise relationship. Whenever a compounding occurs, sandhi will occur:
leo ‘water’ + xeoh ‘haste’ = leoreoh ‘river’
teoq ‘building’ + mah ‘big’ = teopmah ‘big building’, ‘mansion’, ’castle’, etc.
cuh ‘bottom’ + teoq ‘building’ = cucteoq ‘foundations’
Collocation
Two nouns can also be collocated without formal compounding. This can be useful when the relationship
between two nouns is relatively weak, or when a compound creates an established idiom — to avoid the
idiom, the nouns are presented as separate words, without sandhi. It is also used with nouns in a
prepositional role:
leo xeoh — ‘quick water’ (when the interpretation of ‘river’ must be explicitly avoided)
cuh teoq — ‘the underneath space of the building’, ‘beneath the building’
Copulation
Two nouns can be presented either side of the essive operator a which here behaves as a copula. The
sense is no different from that achieved by collocation, except that the sentence can stand alone:
leo a xeoh — ‘water is quick’ (or interpreted another way, ’water with haste’).

Relativising operators (k-)
The operators a i u can take k- making them ‘relativising operators’. A phrase whose operator is a
relativising operator is subordinate to a phrase whose operator is a plain operator. In other words,
relativising operators can turn a Peoppaeq sentence into a noun-phrase argument:
leo ka xeoh — ‘water that is quick’

leoreoh a leo ka xeoh — ‘a river is water that is quick’
leo ki cucteoq u cae — ‘water that [goes] to the foundations [is coming] from the sky’ (perhaps ‘the
roof is leaking’)
Complex concatenation
Triple concatenates come in any of ten forms. These are demonstrated by the following table (won
‘woman’, pa ‘sacred headdress’, lae ‘pitch darkness’).
1 2 3a 3b 4 5
won pa lae won a pa lae won a pa ka lae
won paljae won pa a lae won ka pa a lae
womba lae won a paljae
wombaljae womba a lae
There is not space to describe all of these forms here, of which some would be rarely used, and negligibly
distinct from others — but note that the lower the number (1-5) the more idiomatic an expression is.
The Rule of Expanding Pairs
Complex compounds are parsed in ‘expanding pairs’:
womba = [won + pa] = [‘woman’ + ‘sacred headdress’] = priestess
wombaljae = [[won + pa] + lae] = [[‘priestess’] + ‘darkness’] = priestess of darkness
The first pair of nouns is interpreted as a fixed compound. The concept created by this compound is then
paired with the next compounded word. This process can continue indefinitely:
wombaljaevah = [[[won + pa] + lae] + mah] = great priestess of darkness
Diverse concatenation
Multiple different concatenation strategies can appear together. This allows expressions such as:
womba laevah = priestess of the great darkness
won paljaevah = woman of the big black headdress

Tensing operators (s-)
The operators a i u can take s- making them ‘tensing operators’. As noted above, a i u can by themselves
suggest aspect information. s- forms build on this functionality, and generally focus on tense rather than
aspect (though not necessarily). Tensing operators, where they appear, usually come before a topic, and
can retense an entire sentence. ‘There is/are’ phrases are formed with the present tense s- form:
su leo i teoq — ‘water fell towards the house’ / ‘it rained on the house’
sa wommah — ‘there is a big woman’
si wommah — ‘there will be a big woman’

Temporal context operators (l-)
la, li, lu can separate an expression of time-frame from the main clause. la indicates ‘at the same time...’ or
‘while...’; li indicates ‘and then...’; lu indicates ‘and before that....’
That should do for the most part.
More information can be found in the glossary entry of individual words.