Jackk:
By the time I manage to slip away from the revolving crowd and step out into the back street, the cloudless sky has lost all trace of pink and is fading directly to a navy blue. The first stars twinkle cold above; it is half an hour until moonrise. 
In that time I have to find the emeralds, pass them on to my sister, rejoin the party carrying everything else I could steal from the baron's vault, scatter his valuables onto the dance floor, and escape into the night.
My sister really ought to pick easier marks.

shimobaatar:
At the moment when I succeed in escaping unnoticed out of the spinning crowd and when I exit into the alleyway, the cloudless sky has lost all traces of red and is fading right to indigo. The first stars twinkle coldly above; only half an hour remains until the rising of the moon.  
Before this event I must find these emeralds, pass them along into my sister's hands, rejoin the party while carrying everything else able to be stolen by me from the bank of the baron, scatter his precious items on the dance floor, and escape under the dark of night.
My sister really should give me easier targets.

Iyionaku:
At the moment at which I successfully and without being noticed escape out of the spinning crowd and go into the alleyway, the cloudless night sky loses all traces of red and swiftly becomes purple. The first stars above me shine coldly; half an hour before the rise of the moon remains. Until that moment, that I find these emeralds and deliver them into the hands of my older sister and that I can carry everything that I stole out of the lord’s vault joining the party, and that I scatter their precious possessions at the dance floor and I have to escape them in the dark night.
My older sister will give me the finds easier.

Parlox:
That moment when I succeed in not being noticed and have escaped from the insane crowd and have gone to the narrow street, the cloudless sky of night loses it’s red stains and
quickly becomes purple. As the first cold star shone; for half of an hour I stood before the rising moon. Until I find that emerald and deliver it to my older sister's hand, until then I can carry everything which was stolen from the chest of the lord until half of their valuable possessions are returned, and then distributed on the dance floor it must escape into the night obscur.

sasasha:
At the time of my successful disappearance from sight, my haste [went] from the mad crowd, and then into a street like a canyon. The sky, which was without cloud, [went] from my eyes, and then its red colour [changed] into purple. At the time of the silver-shining which was of the first star, my stance was in front of the moon which [went] into the sky. There will be a time that the emerald [which is the] grasp-request of the sister of much age [will come] to my grasp; there will be a time that my hand [will grasp] everything which is evilly-from the treasure chest of the King; there will be a time that his half of the treasure [will come] to his eyes; there will be a time that the treasure [will] rush towards the four corners of the royal stage; until that time, may [there be] swift disappearance into the night.

Yrusia:
In a time hidden from my sight, I left the barbarians, and then traveled along/went to the canyon-shaped trail. The sky wasn’t cloudy, from what I could tell, and then it turned from red to purple. One night while the small moon was bright, I stood and faced the big moon and the sky. Until (there will be a time that) I take the sapphire from the oldest sister, until my royal treasure contains everything, until they see part of the gold, until the gold comes quickly to the 4 corners of the stage, then the darkness will swiftly go away.

kiwikami:
In that era, which I did not see, I left the barbarians and walked the canyon-like road. I saw it: the red sky was cloudless - it was purple. At night, the small moon was shining, and I stood turned towards the large moon and the sky. I want to take the eldest sister's sapphire, to take everything from the king's treasure hoard. May they see a gold piece; may it come quickly towards the four corners of the stage, then quickly leave the darkness.

Reyzadren:
During the era that was not witnessed by me, the ruffian was abandoned by me, then I walked a road that was similar to a wound. I see that the burning sky is not white, it is dark purple. During the night, the small moon was seen by me, then I stood up, then I faced towards the enlarged moon of the sky. Eldest sibling's blue precious gems are taken by me, then the monarch's hoard is taken by me. The gold piece shall be seen by them. Regarding the dancefloor, the 4 corners shall swiftly be entered by it, then after that, darkness was swiftly exited by it.

littlesalmon:
During times that I didn't feel, I was a lonesome traceur, then I walked a cracked road. I saw that the burned sky wasn't white, but dark purple. During the night, I saw the small moon and stood, the giant sky making me overlook it. The older sibling's blue jewel was taken by me, and then the king's heap. A gold shard shall be seen by them. The place for dancing shall swiftly come to be in four sides, and afterwards, the darkness shall swiftly go out.

Linguifex:
I was in the middle of being a tracer and I was moving in one place but was seen many times.
I did not see the sky's heated crystal, just cold grey.
I was seeing a dim glow that was not moving me, and the cramped-feeling sky felt like a dark time.
The several officials and I will have extremely light-blue things, which exist for the sake of a cohesive timeline.
They will see a glowing segment.
The nexus of motion will be inside the fourth part and time will move towards the departing darkness.

DzêtaRedfang:
I am a tracker, but I have seen something several times every now and then. I don’t see the recently heated crystal’s vapour, and I barely see a dim icy colour. Unmoving, I see a dim glow, and the vapour that’s like a dim icy colour that pressurises itself is an event. A low-level manager and I have very dim icy-coloured objects that manifest themselves such that they are structurally sound for a very long time for the sake of everyone there for days. They see half a glowing worm. The connecting point’s movement occurs inside the fourth segment of a worm, and everyone there for days go towards the sunrise.

Davush:
I am a tracker, but I often did not find anything. I cannot find the heated crystal’s vapour, but I can make out a dark icy colour. Stood still, I can see a dim shine and vapour with a colour like dark ice which is condensing.
The young chief of the workplace and I use darkly coloured, icy tools, the strength of which is visible and lasts for a while for the benefit of everyone there on those days. They find a firefly, half shining. Its four segments move and everyone who goes there stays until dawn on that day. 

Jackk:
I am a hunter, but often I don't catch anything. I cannot find the gemstone of hot smoke, but right now I can see the gem of dark ice. And without moving, I see it shining dark and smoky; it looks like black ice slowly freezing. 
My master and I use modern dark-ice tools of fine quality, so that everyone can tell they are well-made and will last for a good while.
They found a firefly, half-shining. It separated into four moving parts and everyone went to watch the lights until the next day dawned.