Text

Sperið apart son y derran sagaç,
Oç dithyramb es delivrað a Deu.
Jaçol jayen il rad ag joun kiveu
Sur poesy divin ja nou lengaç.

Par caum e kyriel a nossy cot
Gimmolm nos a gið divin gaddar.
Nuton parmainn ec noit a souquondar
Cauçant ag gur d'ivan ne sy senglot.

Ða stou y noit ðocar, nos ður tijon
Vancheu victoir den, vardau laure
Ke tienn toð y toun saivenç igne
Ðolent de veyaçour a tal fujon.

Sey allaçað y faur a Deu n'oc cont;
Y sculd a s'aïðar es paramont.

Context

Boral is a Romance language spoken on an island (Borland) in the North Sea, west of Denmark, about twice the land area of Wales. It exists within an alternate history setting which features a Roman province on Borland and which diverges significantly from our history over the 1500 years since the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.

Grammar

Boral is broadly SVO or V2; the word order of a sentence containing a simple verb is

> subject verb (object) (obliques)
> y domn caugtr y bal "the woman kicks the ball" 
> df woman kick df ball

whereas for a compound verb (an auxiliary with a participle or infinitive) it is

> subject auxiliary (object) verb (obliques)
> y domn vil y bal caugtrar "the woman will kick the ball" 
> df woman fut df ball kick-inf

Word order may however be rather flexible, especially in poetry. It is still generally V2 (the verb appearing in the second position): word orders like "Adverb Verb Subject Object" and "Participle Verb Subject" do occur in the text.

The subject is mandatory, except for certain impersonal verbs. If the object is a pronoun, it always comes immediately adjacent to (and usually before) the main verb.

In the noun phrase, demonstratives and numerals precede the noun, while almost all adjectives follow it. The particles oc, oç, ec and eç denote number and proximity (see Glossary), although for example "oc" (proximate singular) is used more than English would use "this".

Note that nouns do not themselves mark for number; a subject's number may be deduced from the verb conjugation, and nouns might be marked plural with the demonstratives ec and eç "these, those".

In the Glossary, verbs are given in the infinitive form, ending in -ar, -ir or -r. The regular verb forms that appear in the text are:

> past participle -að, -ið
> present participle -ant, -ent
> 3p present -n
> 3p past imperfect -an, -en
> 1p present -au, -eu, -m (indicative or subjunctive)
> 2s imperative -∅
> 3s present -∅

The subjunctive 1p present form may be used with no overt subject to denote "Let's do X".

Any irregular forms will be noted in the Glossary.

Adjectives may be used without derivation as nouns: red -> the red one(s).

Glossary

a - prp. to, at, of
ag - prp. to the (see a "to", y "the")
aïðar - v. help, aid
allaçar - v. grasp, understand, comprehend
apart - adv. out, off, away from here
cauçar - v. hunt, chase (cauçar a uncos "to hunt something")
caum - hymn, song
cont - n. tale, story, account
cot - n. cottage, small house
d' - prp. of, from (before vowels, cf de "of")
de - prp. of, from
delivrar - v. set free, deliver, send
den - adv. therefrom, from it, from them, from this, from that
derran - adj. last, final, previous, most recent
Deu - n. God
dithyramb - n. (poetic) impassioned oration
divin - adj. divine, godly
ða - conj. if
ðocar - v. harrow, vex (especially of a supernatural power "act against, fight")
ðolir - v. gust, billow, rush in
ðurr - v. light, set on fire, ignite
e - conj. and
ec - dem. plural proximate "these"
es - v. is (3sg present indicative, cf star "be")#
faur - adj. clever, skilful; n. skill, ability, wisdom
fujon - n. abundance, bounty
gaddar - v. screw to, get a secure hold of, understand deeply
gimmoldr - v. strive, toil (stem gimmol-)
gið - n. guide, guidance
gur - n. dread, anxiety
igne - adv. on fire, burning, blazing (also metaphorically "potent, even divine")
il - prn. 3pl nominative "they"
ivan - n. child, infant
ja - adv. already, indeed; conj. and even
jair - v. cast, throw (also metaphorically "speak"; stem jay-)
joun - adj. young, novice, inexperienced
ke - conj. (poetic) because, for, as, since
kiveu - n. herd, flock, congregation, followers
kyriel - n. musical scale, gamut; (poetic) a form of Christian prayer
laure - n. degree, accolade, triumph (laure vardir "guarantee a victory")
lengaç - n. language, tongue
n' - prp. in, into (before vowels, cf ne "in")
ne - prp. in, into
noit - n. night (ec noit "at night")
nos - prn. 1pl "we, us, to us, for us"
nossy - prn. 1pl genitive "our"
nou - adj. new, brand-new
nuton - n. will-o'-the-wisp, apparition, whim, caprice
oc - dem. singular proximate "this"
oç - dem. singular distal "that"
par - prp. by, through
paramont - adj. supreme, topmost, paramount
parmanir - v. linger, persist (1s, 3p present stem parmain-; parmanir a VERB-inf "to still VERB")
poesy - n. poetry
rad - n. (poetic) counsel, advice
s' - prn. 3sg,pl reflexive (before vowels, cf se "oneself") 
sagaç - adj. wise, keen, sharp, astute
saivenç - n. wisdom, knowledge
sculd - n. debt, duty, obligation
se - prn. 3sg,pl reflexive "himself, herself, itself, oneself, ourselves, yourselves, themselves, each other, one another"
senglot - n. sob, lament
sey - v. may it be (3sg present subjunctive, cf star "be")
son - v. are (3pl present indicative, cf star "be")
souquondar - v. (poetic) lurk below (also metaphorically "to lie in wait out of sight")
sperir - v. vanish, disappear, go missing
star - v. be (3sg es, 3pl son)
stovir - v. be necessary (stem stou-; stou uncos VERB-inf "one/we/you must VERB something")
sur - prp. on, onto, by means of
sy - prn. 3sg genitive "his, her, its"
tal - adj. such, so much
tenir - v. hold, possess, have (sg, 3p present stem tien-)
tijon - n. torch, firebrand
toð - dem. all
toun - n. town, village, settlement
vancar - v. catch, secure, successfully acquire (1p subjunctive vancheu)
vardir - v. keep, hold onto
veyaçour - n. messenger, (poetic) angel
victoir - n. victory, win
y - art. the