Hey there, sorry for it being a few hours late, I got tied up with life. If there's anything missing just let me know and I will help you as soon as possible.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


.pnevþe, wo imruspöx nhesŕäärlbëj kwärk nhesŕääl do, fäþui tä roifmötu ŕeondörgbödoiñögagõ wo oizõböj nhesŕäivpëx nhesŕäärlbëj yo fhokoböjbõ gøvloigac eu hirŕa. wo orcoipöx’ butõtö’ bo’ peƀaixirãirlñëbäbø̃. wä zëyüolmuä. wä öxü wo orcoiivpüx fëwääryẽ höfmeupowagyö ü të hõboukotö pyaisopotöpõ öxü tä oizõdöda ezërldëdädø̃ serẽdëdäbëjdø̃ öxü øþmatotö rëpnätøtëtø̃ ƀäñmøkë wä’ yã yutõtö aiyer ƀo akeñärlgëdägø̃, fãþui bä buabuao. wä iaþë ro yö pyaisokwöpöxpõ otsirsgyëbëjdø̃ yã of gruyërëlđgyëgø̃ übõëkeërlgyëbø̃ yã õñãi bö ƀö öyavikäirlñëgägyëbëjgø̃. ta otsirsdëdä’ đuko’ wä bøläs ƀaixir dä þüƀä bobobuabuaorkorldörg. ye’ plixärx do wo imrusböj, fäþui øþma jëcäärk øþmagyö jëcäälkärlgyëgø̃ do. wä dozuhokoim. wä bøplixä wo otsirsñëdägyëgø̃. wä iaþë ø̃fgyë ãŕofgyögõ yã tä wõëltkwëpø̃ ãŕofölđgyöböjgõ. i đibwäbli wo mãijekwëpø̃ yo föckuërlmøkë ya yüolmuäbli, wo i tøsŕäëvër, fäþui wä plixä wo imrusgyöbõ yølgñëgä.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Atruozan is a highly synthetic, predominantly fusional language. It’s word order is S > O, meaning that in non-interrogative clauses, the subject must come before the object of the sentence, with no care given as to the location of the verb. This order inverts in interrogative clauses. Due to an extensive morphology accounting for most of the grammatical weight, aside from that ordering, word order is generally free, with the final word or phrase of the clause generally being the one with the most focus, and that emphasis/focus diminishing as you move backwards through the clause’s arguments. It is predominantly dependent-marking.


VERBS
Atruozan verbs tend to be constructed through the affixation of the verbal affixes on nominal roots. This does come with exceptions, of course, some of which so appear in the text. Verbs take a TAM suffix that conjugates for one of five moods, a maximum of eight tense-aspects, 3 persons, and 2 numbers, as well has having three deverbal forms and two derivational ones. It can also take prefixes for habituality, of which there are two types and their negative forms, and negation. This is all done for five distinct verb classes, which each convey information and can drastically affect the meaning of the verb.


Due to the extensive case system, it is also common to drop the verb whenever possible, which is mainly done in matrix clauses when the verb is in the indicative present tense, however should the mood and/or tense already be given elsewhere in the phrase, clause, or sentence such that it is possible to infer the tense of the statement, the verb may be dropped in other environments. If the verb itself is a root, the stem will be its infinitive form without the final –Vl, where V is the “class” vowel that will be discussed shortly.


Found within the text only a small handful TAM suffixes appear, along with both derivational affixes.
Intensifier- NEG- HAB- root –TAM –derivational suffix


Verb Classes:
There are 5 verb classes:
ÄL (other/common verbs)
ËL (creation/destruction verbs)
IL (survival verbs)
OL (intransitive, motion, and change of state verbs)
ÜL (abstract and weather verbs)


Only when using the ÜL class may the pronoun be dropped as they are the only class that only conjugates for one person and number : 3rd person singular (is more of a 5th pers. singular). Provided there is no large change of meaning (ex: fnã-ël “to kill” vs. fnã-ol “to die”), when a verb is used intransitively, the OL class is utilised. The first (and occasionally second) vowel of the suffix is generally telling of the class in use in the indicative .


Tense-Aspect-Mood suffixes that appear:
Suffixes appear in both the Subjunctive and Indicative moods, the latter of which is utilised in matrix clauses to demonstrate epistemic certainty, and the former of which is employed universally in relative clauses (the relative clause requires the use of the subjunctive mood on verbs), and in matrix clauses serves as a very low probability epistemic and deontic, or when used in conjunction with the imperative pronouns, a weak imperative/hortative, though only the relative clause usage is seen in the text. All individual forms due to class change will be listed below:
-älk : ÄL Ind. perfect (present perfect) 3rd pers. sg.
-ä : ÄL Indicative present 1st pers. singular
-äryẽ : ÄL Ind. pres. 1st pers. plural
-ärk : ÄL Ind. pres. 3rd pers. sg.
-ärx : ÄL Ind. future 3rd pers. sg.
-ër : ËL Ind. imperfect (past.imperfective) 1st pers. sg.
-ë : ËL Ind. pres. 1st pers. sg.
-ike : IL Ind. perf. 3rd pers. sg.
-ir : IL Ind. Imperf. 1st pers. sg.
-irã : IL Ind. imperf. 3rd pers. pl.
-ika : IL Ind. pluperfect 3rd pers. sg.
-ork : OL Ind. imperf. 1st pers. sg.
-ok : OL Ind. pres. 3rd pers. sg.


The perfect denotes an event viewed as a single finished entity with clearly definable start and end points that occurred within the past, over a day or two ago (which is covered by the near past which is not found in this text).
The imperfect denotes an event that was continuous or that still is continuous that began in the past and has no clearly definable start or end points.
The pluperfect denotes a past anterior action (an action that had already occurred further in the past than the matrix clause’s past action). For example : “I had already eaten when she called”. It is normally expressed via a simple juxtaposition of the matrix and dependent clauses, in writing delineated via a comma. More on the pluperfect later in a section on action nominals.


Deverbal suffixes:
In the present tense, the gerund takes on the meaning of “While X / In X”, and is functionally an adverb, going before the clause or phrase whose verb it modifies, separated by a comma, and if not at the start of a sentence, after a semi-colon. More relevant to the text, however, is its future form, which bears a meaning of “In order to do X”, which is very closely shared by a nominal construction that will be explored later on.
The Infinitive is used for complement clauses when the complement clause’s tense is in the present and is constituted of nothing but the verb itself. Once there are more constituents to it, or there are non-present tenses involved, you must then switch to using a nominalised verb. It thus gets used especially alongside verbs such as “can”, “want”, and “must”. The present suffixes in the text are as follows :
-äbli : ÄL Gerund future
-äl : ÄL Infinitive


Derivational suffixes:
Derivational suffixes include the Agentive and Nominaliser suffixes. The former acts to create an animate noun from the verb, and functions similarly to the “-er” suffix in the English word “kicker”. As a noun it may then take case suffixes after it. The later is used in relative time specifications (“before the time of the killing”, for example, would be “POSTE kill-NMZ-LOC.IN” in its simplest gloss), in complement clauses when the tense is non-present (not the present tense) and/or when there is more than a single verb constituting it, as well as in comparative constructions between verb phrases. Its usage forms an inanimate noun.


What is important to note, especially with the nominaliser, is that you are able to conjugate a verb with a TAM suffix before deriving it, which is commonly used as a way to convey the time of the occurrence being described. For example, “kill-IND.PERF.3S-NMZ” would mean “a killing that had occurred in the past”. This usage does show up in the text, and it would be good to note that should this convey the tense of the clause, and the cases used cover the meaning of the verb, the verb both can and will be dropped from the sentence, even if it is in a non-present tense. There are five suffixes that appear, four nominalisers and one agentive :
-ärl : ÄL Nominaliser (NMZ)
-ërl : ËL NMZ
-irl : IL NMZ
-iv : IL Agentive (AGE)
-orl : OL NMZ


Reverse and Passive :
The passive voice is formed through the use of the enclitic “do” which comes immediately after the verb or its nominalised form. More interesting is the reverse (RVS) proclitic which comes immediately before the verb and inverts it’s root’s meaning. For instance, if I had the verb “to speak”, “RVS=speak” would mean “to listen”. The reverse clitic is “i”. This usually changes the meaning of a verb in a fairly predictable manner.


Habituality:
Habituality in Atruozan is expressed through the use of verbal prefixes, and come in two major varieties : consistent and inconsistent. The former expresses a much more scheduled, consistent, "on a regular basis". It is commonly, but not necessarily, accompanied by an expression denoting the time elapsed during each occurence, and this does not appear in the text. It is also used to express a sense of the continuative ("kept on", as in "I kept on moving", see example). The latter expresses a much more sporadic, "from time to time" habituality, and does not appear in the text.


There also exists negative habitual prefixes, that do not serve to negate the verb, but rather the habituality itself, and finds most of its common spoken usage in replies (see example 2). It can also be used to convey a sense of "not always", such that "1S.NOM NEG.HAB.CONS-dance" would mean "I don't always/consistently dance". This is most commonly used to denote a change of state of mind or being from previous uses of the habitual prefixes.
Ex: 1S.NOM HAB.CONS-move-IND.IMPF.1S
“I kept on moving”
Ex 2: 1S.NOM NEG.HAB.CONS-run
“I run (but not hab.cons)”, a possible answer to “Do you run (hab.cons)?”


The single prefix found in the text is:
pe- : Habitual consistent


Negativity:
Atruozan's negative is formed through the use of a verbal prefix, "zë-". It may be reduplicated for a stronger negative.


ADJECTIVES
Adjectives can be formed through derivational affixes from nouns, or can be roots in some cases, with nouns being then being formed through derivational affixes on them. This latter seen several times in the text. Adjectives always follow the noun, as do numerals which behave exactly as adjectives, and agree with the noun in gender and number. Adjectives are by nature inanimate, and thus don’t take a suffix when agreeing with a singular inanimate noun. There is a strict adjectival order which can change the meaning of an adjective, and will thus be listed in full below. The sole “pure” gender agreement suffix that appears is:
-kë : Front Class animateliser (makes the root word animate, glossed “ANZ”)


Back and Front Class:
Adjectives, like nouns, are classified as being either Back Class or Front Class based on the last vowel or diphthong of the root. This causes the affixes used to either be “back suffixes” in which the back set of vowels is utilised, or “front vowels” in which the front set is utilised, and is caused by a now dead vowel harmony system. Nominal and adjectival suffixes thus come in pairs.
Front vowels include all of : /i y e ẽ ø ø̃ ɛ a aɪ̯ ãɪ̯/ <i ü e ẽ ø ø̃ ë ä ai ãi>
Back vowels include all of : /u o õ ɵ̞ ɑ ɑ̃ oɪ̯ ɜʊ̯/ <u o õ ö a ã oi eu>


Adjectival order/Adjectival Classes:
Following a noun, this order, which comprises of 13 “slots” or “classes” is the order in which all adjectives must follow the noun. Changing the class of an adjective can and will change its meaning and interpretation. The order is as follows:
1)        Numeral
2)        Colour
3)        Size
4)        Visual descriptors
5)        Shape
6)        State of being
7)        Abstract (ex: I feel cold)
8)        Touch descriptors
9)        Tangencies (visible, ghostly, material)
10)        Emotions
11)        Type of being (divine, mortal, etc.)
12)        Relative clauses
13)        Predicative adjectives
Within this order, classes 4 through 8 form a block wherein aside from the Class 4, if there is not an adjective of the previous class within the Noun Phrase, one of the following four particles (which have other usages that will be touched upon later) is used and placed before the adjective within its associated class:
ya : Class 5
yã : Class 6
yo : Class 7
yø̃ : Class 8


Predicative adjectives:
Predicative adjectives, where they appear, following the class order, comes after the noun, regardless of the location of the copula, should said copula not be dropped. In cases where the tense is clear through context, primarily mattering within the indicative mood, the copula is dropped. However, instead of a “pure drop”, a special set of agreement suffixes are used on the predicative adjective instead of the regular ones, with suffixes being used when agreement would keep the adjective inanimate. Two of these appear in the text :
-koim : Back Class Copular Animateliser (ANZ)
-gac : B.C Copular Inanimateliser (INZ)


Derivational affixes found in the text:
Adjectives can be derived into nouns, or adverbs. In the text, both cases are seen. The suffixes seen are the following:
-mu : Back Class Nominaliser
-þe : Front Class Adverbialiser (adverbs formed in this manner affect the clause’s verb)


All adverbs, be they roots or formed through the suffix above, must go before the clause or phrase whose main verb it modifies, separated by a comma. In the instances of it appearing between two clauses or phrases, a semi-colon is employed before it (this does not hold true for relative clauses, but they do not appear in the text). Should an adverb be modifying an adjective, the word must first be an adjective, following which it will follow the adjective it’s modifying, while also agreeing with the head noun. It is then separated from the modified adjective by the following preposition:
eu : adverbialiser (when the adverb modifies an adjective)


Note that this need not take the copular agreement suffixes if modifying a predicative adjective.


NOUNS
Nouns in Atruozan can decline for any of 13 cases, with a secondary construct state (CNS) suffix existing in case another case is in use. They can also decline for number and one of 4 genders, and can derive into adjectives if needed. They also serve as the root for most verbs. They can take prepositions to combine with cases, as well as having determiners for definite nouns, as well as plural indefinites (singular indefinites have no determiner) and the partitive singular.
Intensifier- root –case suffix –CNS –ADJZ -PL


Gender:
In Atruozan, each noun is inherently belonging to one of four genders: animate, inanimate, masculine, and feminine. Each of these genders of noun decline with different suffixes, and the root of the noun can be “derived” through these suffixes into a new gender, from which point on any new suffixes would have to use that root gender’s suffixes.
For instance, the root for dog is “cwega” and is animate. If I wanted to specify that this dog is female, and it was the subject of the sentence, I would use the animate nominative “feminiser” suffix:
cwega-cu
dog(AN)-NOM.FEMZ
The name and extra “Z” at the end of the glossings for the gender changes caused by these suffixes is in analogy to the glossing and naming conventions for adverbialiser, adjectiviser, nominaliser, verbaliser, etc. affixes, as much like result of the usage of an adjectiviser is the changing of a root from say, a noun to an adjective, the result of the usage of a feminiser suffix is the changing of the gender of the stem from animate to feminine.


Case suffixes:
In the text, nine “cases” appear, thereincluded eight cases (sort of) and the construct state. These are found across three of the four genders. If a noun has no suffix on it (null suffix), it means that it is both nominative and the original inherent gender of the noun. The suffixes are as follows, with 1 meaning the voiceless plosive nearest the PoA of the first consonant of the stem, and 2 being the same except for voiced plosives, <w y h x j ŕ> resulting in the furthest back possible plosive :
-kwë : Animate Front Class Accusative animateliser (ANZ)
-kwö : An. Back Class Accusative ANZ
-gyë : Inanimate F.C Accusative inanimateliser (INZ)
-gyö : Inan. B.C Accusative INZ
-1øtë : An. F.C Dative ANZ
-1otö : An. B.C Dative ANZ
-2ëdä : Inan. F.C Dative INZ
-2öda : Inan. B.C Dative INZ
-pëx : An. F.C Nominative construct state ANZ
-pöx : An. B.C Nominative construct state ANZ
-püx : An. F.C Nominative construct state feminiser (FEMZ)
-bëj : Inan. F.C Nominative construct state INZ
-böj : Inan. B.C Nominative construct state INZ
-1ø̃ : An. F.C Construct state ANZ
-1õ : An. B.C Construct state ANZ
-2ø̃ : Inan. F.C Construct state INZ
-2õ : Inan. B.C Construct state INZ
-õtö : An. B.C Instrumental-comitative ANZ
-mö1u : An. B.C Locative FEMZ
-ñë2ä : Inan. F.C Locative INZ
-ñö2a : Inan. B.C Locative INZ
-dörg : Inan. B.C Ablative INZ
-bödoi : Inan. B.C Prolative INZ
-ëlt : An. F.C Essive ANZ
-ëlđ : Inan. F.C Essive INZ
-ölđ : Inan B.C Essive INZ


The cases each have the ability to combine with prepositions to offer a larger variety of expressed cases (the prepositions go before the determiners); however, these are largely optional, and the meaning of the given case is usually determined through the sentence itself and context, thus there only being two instances of preposition-case combinations in the text.


The cases found in the text and what they cover:
NOM         — Nominative
ACC         — Accusative
DAT        — Dative, Benefactive, Terminative, Allative, Illative
CNS        — Construct State
INSTRC — Instrumental-comitative, Ornative
LOC         — Locative, Inessive, Antessive, Postessive, Temporal
ABL        — Ablative, Elative, Lative, Initiative, Causal
PROL        — Prolative, Superessive, Supralative, Subessive, Subelative, Perlative
ESS        — Essive, Semblative


Dative Case:
The dative in Atruozan has many uses, the most common of which is the marking of the indirect object in ditransitive statements, the patient in transitive causatives, and the reintroduced semantic subject in transitive passives. It also serves as an allative (movement towards x, x being the object marked with the dative, see example below) which can be specified through the use of a preposition, as can all “sub-cases”; however, this is not always done, as its usage can usually be inferred through context, and prepositions are not used with pronouns. It can also serve as an illative or terminative, marking movement into or destination/ending of movement respectively, as well as a benefactive. The terminative is especially used as a construction in action nominals and will be explored later, but as mentioned previously, can serve as a way of conveying “in order to do x” (see ex 2). The choice of whether to use it or the future gerund commonly comes down to one of the order of arguments for focus from the right-hand side of the clause.


Ex (as allative): 1S.NOM walk-IND.PRES.1S store-DAT
“I walk to/towards the store”
Ex 2 (as terminative): 1S.NOM go-IND.PRES.1S TERM ox-DAT find-NMZ-DAT-CNS
“I go in order to find oxes”


Instrumental-comitative Case:
The instrumental-comitative functions as a standard INSTRC does, denoting a sense of “with/using” when in regards to both objects and others (ex: people). It also functions as an ornative, which tends to use its preposition and not do so in this text, expressing a sense of “equipped with”. In this sense it can also mean wearing or to have (more on this later), the former as in the example provided below. These uses are especially used in conjunction with verb dropping, which will be given a section later on.


Ex (as ornative): 1S.NOM wear-IND.PRES.1S (ORN) hat-INSTRC
“I wear a hat”


Locative Case:
The locative functions as a catch-all when to both spatial and temporal location. It can function as a general locative does for specifying spatial location and relation, or it can be used to specify a time or date, and the relation to that. For instance, “night-LOC” would be interpreted as “at night”, whereas “house-LOC” could mean either being in or near or on the house, making context important. This is important in a lot of action nominals, as will be seen later.


Ablative case:
The ablative case generally keeps for theme, and does very much so in this text, of movement away from a given reference point. Thus “city-ABL” would be “moving away from a city”, most commonly. The ablative tends to keep this base meaning throughout the text, with the exception of its lative usage, which is used to talk about a duration of time, or simply the act of movement. This preposition-case combo in the temporal usage expresses “while” or “during”, and takes the form: LAT x-ABL.


Prolative case:
The prolative expresses movement by way of something most commonly. Of all its other uses, the standard prolative and the perlative uses are the only ones relevant to this text (granted, the perlative preposition does not appear), this latter expressing movement along something, or along a surface/following along something/a surface.


Essive Case:
The essive case expresses the states of being of a given noun, so to speak, as well as the semblative, which bears the meaning of “like/similar to”, such that “SEM dog-ESS” would mean “like a dog” (see example). It is especially used in conjunction with verb dropping, and usually bears the meaning of “is/as a x” (see example 2).


Ex (as semblative): sing-IND.PRES.3S cat.NOM SEM dog-ESS
“a cat sings like a dog”
Ex 2: DEF.AN.SG cat.NOM dog-ESS be-IND.PRES.3S
“the cat is a dog”


Possession:
In Atruozan, the possessor comes before the possessee, which is marked with the construct state suffix. By this method, you can easily chain many possessors together. The nominative construct state suffix (-pëx/-bëj) are only used when there is not another case suffix on the noun (aka the head noun is the subject). The exception to this rule is when a noun is possessed by two different possessors at the same time, in which case the nominative CNS suffix is used first, followed by the plainer CNS suffix, regardless of what case the noun is in due to potential previous suffixes.


This scenario of marking two possessors on a head noun is due to secondary possessors, such as the rice in “his bowl of rice”. In these situations, the bowl, being the head of the phrase, comes last, with the secondary possessor coming immediately before it, the two separated by the particle “yo”, whose other usages will be explored later. Both the external possessor and the original one are owned by him in this sentence, thus they both take a CNS suffix, with the bowl taking a second one because of the external possession from the rice. All pronouns must also be in the disjunctive to be a possessor, with the exception of pronouns in the construct state, which are effectively DSJV.CNS pronouns, denoting that the pronoun is possessed be it singly or doubly or more. The case of the head noun is also marked on all possessors except for pronouns (with some exceptions to be noted later) (and on any nouns modifying a possessed noun through the use of the particles explained in a later section, in which case they take the same base number of CNS suffixes as the noun they are modifying).


Ex: 3S.DSJV rice-ABL-CNS yo bowl-ABL-CNS.NOM-CNS
“his bowel of rice”
In action nominals, as will be delved more into later, there are two ways nominalisation of a simple clause, x.NOM y-IND z-ACC, can occur :


x z-CNS y-NMZ-CNS or x z-ACC-CNS yo y-NMZ-CNS.NOM-CNS


Where <yo> is a particle that will be discussed later on. The main difference in choice between these two is in desired “weight of focus” of the head, the stronger favouring the latter over the former, and especially whether “z” is a complement clause or not, especially if it’s a simple clause where z is a verb employing the infinitive. In this case, the latter is also favoured, especially in the second scenario of the latter, with it being more variable in result should z be a more complex complement clause.


Number:
If a noun, adjective, or pronoun is plural, it takes the following suffix:
-’ : plural


Number is mainly expressed through the use of determiners, which come before the noun and agree in number, definiteness, and gender. Possessed nouns may take a determiner before all of its possessors, with only certain prepositions coming before them (though many prepositions come after the determiner).


Derivational suffixes:
A noun can be derived into an adjective through the use of a suffix, the newly formed adjective then taking the base adjectival inanimate noun class. The suffix found in the text is:
-mø : Front Class Adjectiviser


Likewise, a derivational suffix that keeps a noun a noun, but makes it inanimate, is one loaned from Neviran, a language of macro-regional power and especially historical military power. This suffix bears the meaning of “study of X”, very akin to the “-ology” suffix in English, and is as follows :
-powa : B.C study_of suffix (INZ)


Verb dropping:
In atruozan, should a verb be in the present indicative, or the tense of the verb in the indicative be already stated in the clause (through other verbs generally), the verb will be dropped due to the extensive case system, should its meaning be roughly covered through the cases.


For instance, the ablative means movement away from something generally, so “I walk away from the store” which would normally be “1S.NOM walk-IND.PRES.1S store-ABL” could have walk dropped, shortening it to “1S.NOM store-ABL”. The context and any necessary adverbs will let it be known how the movement took place, be it by walking, running, etc. The cases’ meanings when verb-dropped tend to stay close to their meanings and usages elsewhere, with a few notable additions :


•        The ACC can take on a more temporal meaning roughly equivalent to “for x (time period”.
•        The INSTRC can take on a meaning of “to have”, so “1S.NOM tool-INSTRC” would mean “I have a tool” (or “I am using a tool”, depending on context).
•        The ESS very much so takes on the meaning of “to be” in a given sense, such that “1S.NOM tool-ESS” would mean “I am a tool” or, especially if using the semblative preposition, “I am like a tool”




PARTICLES
The adjective class particles have more usages, but for the purposes of this, the non-adjectival usage of “yo”, “yã”, and “ya” in the text will be discussed. The former of these is used in this case to show the relation between the external possessor and the possessee, such that they are considered as a single entity being possessed by the preceding possessor. The second is employed in a similar fashion, except that the later shows the relation between two nouns, mainly one that’s either nominative, accusative or dative, and one that’s any of the other cases, so that it affects and modifies the noun, rather than the verb. These particles go between the two nouns/noun phrases that are being put in relation to one another. It can also go in between of a noun and a pronoun. The last of them, “ya”, has but one use in the text : to effectively adjoin two gerunds in the gerund “adverbial phrase” together in one, similar to an “and”. It also allows one to effectively adjoin another noun phrase connected by “yã” to a noun that already has a “yã-d” noun or noun phrase on it (see example), though this is not seen in the text.
Ex : dog(AN) yã city(IN)-LOC.INZ ya cat(AN)-TRANSL.ANZ eat-IND.PRES.3S
“The dog in a city that is turning into a cat/turns into a cat eats/is eating”


INTENSIFIERS
Effectively any noun, adjective, adverb, or verb, can take one of the intensifier prefixes. It depends mainly on context and the nature of the affected stem as to what the augmentative and diminutive prefixes specifically modifies about the root, be it size, age, strength, authoritative status, etc… and a second prefix can be added on to intensify the meaning of the prefix further. All but one of the prefixes shows up in the text (1 being the voiceless plosive nearest to the root’s first consonant’s point of articulation and 2 being the voiced version of 1). Here, the Front-Back Class is “harmonized” to the first vowel of the root, rather than the last:
1ø- : Front Class Diminutive
2ø- : F.C Augmentative
2o- : B.C Augmentative


PRONOUNS
Pronouns in Atruozan must stay in a given order directly before the verb for the most part, however, the disjunctive pronoun can be found anywhere. The order, as far as it concerns the text, is:
1)Nominative
2)Accusative/Reciprocal
3)Dative
4)Else (INSTRC, LOC, etc…)


The third person pronouns only declines for animate and inanimate genders outside of the disjunctive. To make it plural, it takes the same suffix as nouns and adjectives, as was previously mentioned.


Two groups of pronouns don’t adhere strictly to this : the disjunctives (and thus construct state pronouns) and the demonstrative pronouns. The former are effectively removed from the hierarchy, and the latter can appear in a number of places.


The demonstrative pronouns and the reciprocals and reflexives are the only pronouns allowed to directly take nominal suffixes on themselves, with the former being used possessively to denote things akin to “this dog” in “this dog ran”. There is a 3-way proximity distinction in demonstratives.


Pronouns can take adjectives like normal nouns.


ACTIVE NOMINAL CONSTRUCTIONS
Active nominal constructions are performed in Atruozan using two basic processes : possessive constructions, and double-possessive constructions, employing here the construct state over the genitive. ANCs are very widely used in the language as one of its most productive processes. There are a few factors that contribute to the widespreadness of the constructions, most notably the suffixnauhme in possessives, the possessive nature of ANCs in atruozan, the heavy morphological weight on and emphasis of nouns, and the extreme versatility of the cases.


Active nominals see the greatest use in three key areas, barring nominalization for the facilitation of verb dropping : causal phrases, temporal/locative phrases, and complement clauses. In all three of these, all constituents must be functionally part of the same NP. This is rigidified due to the nature of the cases and case stacking explained previously. The result is a situation wherein the ultimate head noun’s case is present on nearly if not all arguments within it (that can take the case of course). This spans from simple examples such as examples 1 and 2 (ANCs in []) :


Ex 1 (CAU) : [CAU rock-ABL break-NMZ-ABL-CNS] | 1S.NOM jump-IND.PRS.1S
“Because of a rock breaking, I jump”.
Ex 2 (complement) : 1S.NOM like-IND.PRS.1S [beef-ACC eat-NMZ-ACC-CNS]
“I like eating beef”.


Note that you can have adjectives, relative clauses, and other nouns “qualifying” via particles the core construction, but at its simplest, there must be but one head noun.


In the nominalisation of transitive and ditransitive constructions, notably for the former, the nominalisation strategy chosen varies, as explained in a previous section. Adverbs affecting the verb become adjectives in the ANC.


This ultimately leads to some more complex situations wherein occasionally you end up needing to nominalise two clauses into a single NP. Such is the case with conditional statements when given as a condition or when present as a complement clause (for the former, think “because if I ate, I would win, …”) primarily. Looking at the result in a complement clause (though the differences to a causal phrase is just the addition of a CAU preposition initially and the substitution of the omnipresent accusative for the ablative). For conditional statements, where the former clause is the protasis and the latter the apodosis, the manner of nominalisation to form the ANC in the simplest possible example is as follows :


w.NOM x-COND | y.NOM z-COND
↓
y z-(COND)-NMZ-CNS yã CAU w x-(COND)-NMZ-ABL-CNS


Effectively what occurs here, is that both the protasis and apodosis undergo their own nominalisation to form two ANCs, and then that of the protasis is put into the causal and made independent of the main clause’s verb and thus put in relation to the apodosis via the use of the yã particle.


From this process, a very similar one that does appear in this text is formed, which applies when the pluperfect or the future anterior are in use (utterances of the form “dependant clause | matrix clause”, in either order, with the dependant clause bearing the PLUP or FANT tense). As such, where IND is any TAM viable in the matrix clause:


w.NOM x-PLUP/FANT | y.NOM z-IND
↓
y z-(IND)-NMZ-CNS yã (ANTE) w x-PLUP/FANT-NMZ-LOC-CNS


In this construction, which is considered a single noun phrase that is an ANC of “w had/will have had x-ed when y z-ed/z-s” to put it admittedly fairly poorly. Anything in the previous statements in parentheses are at least sometimes optional, for instance the ANTE is never an absolute requirement though it was included in the text for your convenience, the IND isn’t required if it represents any IND.PRS tense, and the COND isn’t obligatorily required in the conditional ANC unless it is a counterfactual conditional in which case the mood used is the hypothetical, and then it is required.


GLOSSARY
n.         noun
v.         verb
adj.         adjective
pron.         pronoun
prep.         preposition
conj.         conjunction
det.        determiner
an.         animate
in.         inanimate
masc.         masculine
fem.         feminine
äl.         ÄL verb class
ël.         ËL verb class
il.         IL verb class
ol.         OL verb class


The alphabetical order used is that of the standard roman alphabet as used by English, with “accented” variants of a letter following the base glyph.


aiyer – prep. terminative case
akeñäl – v.äl. to find
ãŕof – n.in. trail/path
bä – pron. nominative 3.AN
bo – pron. disjunctive 3.AN
bøläs – pron. instrumental-comitative 3.AN
buabua – n.in. fun
but – pron. reciprocal 3.AN
ƀaix – n.an. movement
ƀäñ – n.in. hate
ƀo – pron. disjunctive 3.IN
ƀö – pron. construct state 3.IN
dä – det. partitive inanimate sg.
đibwäl – v.äl. to search
đuko – adj. every
ezël – v.ël. to give
fäþui – conj. but/however
fëwä – n.in. studying
fhoko – n.in. ability
föcku – n.in. fear
gøvloi – adj. bad
gruyër – n.in. opportunity
hirŕa – adj. weird
höfmeu – n.an. spirit
hõbou – n.an. shaman
iaþ – n.in. knowledge (note that iaþël (knowledge-INF(ËL.class)) is “to believe)**
imrus – n.an tribe
imrus – n.in home
jëcä – n.in. voice
kaiŕõ – prep. causal case/because
kwäl – v.äl. can
mãije – n.an. dream
mãije – n.an. vision
nhesŕä – n.in. speech (note that nhesŕäiv (speech-AGE(IL.class)) is “orator”)**
of – prep. semblative case/like
oizõ – n.in. village
orcoi – n.an. friend**
otsirs – n.in. destination
otsirs – n.in. purpose
öxü – conj. and (used in lists such that all things affected can occupy a single slot)
öyav – n.an. eye
õñãi – prep. antessive case/in front of/after (when used temporally)
øþma – pron. distal demonstrative (also used to refer to things previously mentioned)
ø̃f – pron. proximal demonstrative
plixäl – v.äl. to want
plixäl – v.äl. to miss (in the sense of longing for)
pnev – adj. good
pyaiso – n.an. group (of individuals)
rëpnä – n.an. soul
ro – pron. disjunctive 3.FEM (3pers. feminine)
roif – n.an. hare (note : in the usage in the text, the “hare” is the Sun)
ŕeon – n.in. sky
serẽ – n.in. house
serẽ – n.in shelter
sŕäëv – n.in. truth
ta – det. definite inanimate pl.
tä – det. definite inanimate sg.
të – det. definite animate sg.
ü – conj. and (standard form)
übõ – n.in. thought
wä – pron. nominative 1pers.
wo – pron. disjunctive 1pers.
wõ – n.an. ancestor
ye – pron. dative 1pers.
yö – pron. construct state 1pers.
yølg – n.in. present (as in the time frame)
yut – pron. reciprocal 1pers.
yüol – adj. happy
zuho – adj. tired
þüƀä – prep. lative case