Se poð fort parolar ny lengaç de mell’oc gent; portant, a mesur d'eç hour passant, l'oration dað par y locutour es cos stragn abject. Mell'amig fruin atorn, pu jo no so allagr. Mey e mell'amig studin dæmon, e nos trovaum un gast ojous noscon mostrað soulor ag ci thaumatorg eð ag concegl local, un cos broucabr. Jo crey l'eç autr con mey ern en pesant lontemp pos jo foy fis a l'examinar.


Nos voum magn gauïr ne l'eç escapat faint accougl. Nos mancareu ig cas nous, pu nos voum stoir racontar por memorar. Vray, j'ay magn me stordið ; jo desir ig mell'audaç revin. Lonc mey l'oc camin es y camin de my prealdr : me fal my sogn malvaç carr por hugt cavir. L'ig a bel star vray, afont mey es luy desirant remanir cas mey.


----------


Boral is a Romance language spoken on an island in the North Sea, west of Denmark, about twice the land area of Wales.


Boral is broadly SVO or V2; the word order of a sentence containing a simple verb is


subject verb (object) (obliques),


whereas for a compound verb (an auxiliary with a participle or infinitive) it is


subject auxiliary (object) verb (obliques).


The subject is mandatory, except for certain impersonal verbs. If the object is a pronoun, it always comes immediately before the main verb.


In the noun phrase, demonstratives and numerals precede the noun, while adjectives follow it. The particles oc, ig, eç and ci denote number and proximity, although for example “oc“ (proximal singular) is used more than English uses “this”.


Verbs have two participles: a present participle in -nt, and a past participle usually in -ð. The regular verb forms that appear in the text are:


Present
sg: -∅
3pl: -n


Recent Past
1sg: ay + past participle


Remote Past
1pl: -aum


Imperfect continuous
3pl: ern + present participle


Taken Future
1pl: voum + infinitive


Owed Future
1pl: infinitive + -eu


Relative clauses are formed as shown:
the man who loves me = “the man loving me” y segr m’amant
the man who I love = “the man loved by me” y segr meyon amað


The forms meaning “by X” are called the demoted pronouns.


The following irregular verbs appear in the text:


star
present: jo so, tu es, l’es; nos som, vos soð, il son
remote past: jo foy, tu foy, i foy; nos foim, vos foist, il foirn


revenir
subjunctive: jo revin, tu revin, i revin; nos revinau, vos revinað, il revinn


The verb suffix -br produces an adjective meaning “able to”; for example amar “to love”, amabr “lovable”.


The prepositions a “to”, de “from” and ne “in” interact with a following definite article y to give ag, dy, ny.


The construction “ne + present participle” means “while Xing”.


----------


a - prep. at, to
a mesur de - prep. during, in the course of
abject - adj. awful, despicable, disgusting
accougl - adv. together
afont - prep. within, inside
aïr - vb. to have, to possess
aïr bel - vb. no matter how much
allagr - adj. happy, 
amig - n. friend
atorn - adv. around, about
audaç - n. boldess, audacity, ambition
autr - adj./n. other, another, different
broucar - vb. to enjoy, to have fun with
camin - n. path, way, road, track
carr - vb. to search for, to seek, to look for
cas - prep. at the home of
cas - n. case
cavir - vb. to get, to obtain, to become
ci - dem. (distal) plural
creir - vb. to believe, to think
con - prep. with, alongside, using
concegl - n. council, committee
cos - n. thing
cos - part. adverbial
dæmon - n. demon, monster
dar - vb. to give
de - prep. of, from, about
desirar - vb. to want, to desire
dou - num. two
e - conj. and
eç - dem. (proximal) plural
eð - conj. and
en - pron. of it, about it, from it/them
escapat - n. adventure
examinar - vb. to examine, to look at
fair - vb. to do, to make
falir - vb. to be necessary
figr - vb. to put down, to stop, to place
fort - adv. well, in a good way
fruyar - vb. to dance, to court
gast - n. ghost, spirit
gauïr - vb. to rejoice, to have fun
gent - n. people, group, tribe
hour - n. time, hour
hugt - n. happiness, joy
ig - dem. (distal) singular
ig - part. complement
j’ - pron. first person singular subject
jo - pron. first person singular subject
l’ - dem. definite article
l’ - pron. third person singular object
le - pron. third person singular object
lengaç - n. language
local - adj. local, nearby
locutour - n. speaker, orator
lonc - adj. long, distant
lonc - prep. along, according to
lontemp - adv. for a long time
luy - pron. third person singular disjunctive/dative
magn - adv. very, much, many, a lot
malvaç - adj. evil, wicked, mean
mancar - vb. to lack, to miss
me - pron. first person singular object/reflexive
mell’ - pron. pron. first person singular possessive
memorar - vb. to remember
mesur - measure, course, sequence, row
mey - pron. first person singular disjunctive
mostrar - vb. to show, to display, to demonstrate
my - pron. first person singular possessive
ne - prep. in, while
no - part. negative
nos - pron. first person plural subject
noscon - pron. first person plural demoted
nous - pron. first person plural disjunctive
oc - dem. (proximal) singular
ojous - adj. hateful, awful, odious
oration - n. speech, oration
par - prep.  by,
parolar - vb. to speak
passar - vb. to pass, to spend (time)
pesar - vb. to think, to ponder, to imagine
poðir - vb. to be able
por - prep. for, in order tol
portant - conj. but, however
pos - prep. after, following
prealdr - n. ancestor, forebear
pu - conj. but, even so
racontar - vb. to tell, to recount
remanir - vb. to stay, to remain
revenir - vb. to come back, to return
se - pron. third person reflexive
sogn - n. dream
sogn malvaç - n. nightmare
soulor - conj./adv. then, next, afterward
star - vb. to be
star fis a - vb. to be done with, to be finished with
stoir - n. story, tale
stragn - adj. strange, odd
studiar - vb. to study, to research
thaumatorg - n. wizard, magician, shaman
trey - num. three
trovar - vb. to find, to reach, to discover
un - dem. indefinite article
un - num. one
venir - vb. to come
vray - adj. true, real, correct
vray - adv. indeed
y - dem. definite article