Part 1. Nouns

1a. Noun classes
Nouns in Awatese have relatively simple morphology, not declining for case or morphological number. This is
why Awatese uses pluractionality, explained later in this document. Nouns are, however, marked for
possession, and this varies by noun class. Noun classes are among the most important aspects of Awatese.
There are 3 noun classes, all of which will appear at least once in the text:
❖ Animate: Glossed as G9, this includes humans, animals, and abstract nouns, among others.
❖ Semianimate: Glossed as G7, this covers body parts, fruit, and other miscellaneous items.
❖ Inanimate: Glossed as GX, this class covers inanimate objects, settlements such as villages or cities (but
not countries; those are considered animate), and anything not included in the previous two classes.
Don’t worry about trying to guess which noun applies to which class; they are marked with affixes depending
on the class (this will be explained later in this section). All items in the glossary are also glossed for noun
class.
1b. Possession marking
As aforementioned, nouns are marked by possessor. Most vowel-vowel and consonant-consonant boundaries
are intersected by epenthetic phonemes. Between vowels the epenthesis is -h-, and between consonants it is
-a-. This applies to other parts of speech, too.

C B B C o n l a n g i n g R e l a y X I I - A w a t e s e

The below table illustrates the affixes used by nouns:
Possessor Animate (G9) Semianimate (G7) Inanimate (GX)

unpossessed (none) -ka ą-
1st singular -ngą -ngą ą-ngą

1st plural exclusive -nmą -nmą ą-nmą
1st plural inclusive -mą -mą ą-mą
2nd person -ri -ika ą-ri
2nd person formal -i -ną ą-yi
3rd animate (G9) -tą -tą ą-tą
3rd semianimate (G7) -ą -ą ą-ą
3rd inanimate (GX) -hą -hą ą-hą
⚠ NOTE: Pay close attention to the unpossessed forms as they are used with EVERY unpossessed noun! Also,
make sure you notice the epentheses that occur as well. Sometimes two possessed forms of the same noun
with different possessors may appear the same, and this is normal; the context will make it clear.
Example of the full paradigm of an animate noun:
yaxą “guardian(s)”
yaxąngą “my guardian(s)”
yaxąnmą “our guardian(s)” (exclusive)
yaxąmą “our guardian(s)” (inclusive)
yaxąri “your guardian(s)” (informal)
Yaxąhi “your guardian(s)” (formal)
yaxątą “its/their guardian(s)” (animate)
yaxąhą “its/their guardian(s)” (semianimate)
yaxąhą “its/their guardian(s)” (inanimate)
1c. Noun compounds
Nouns can compound onto each other, often concatenatively. The meaning is often not too far from what it
would be if it were not compounded.

Example:
pąk ąkarał “spring equinox”
+ nguwetimą(ka) “ceremony”
pąkąkarałnguwetimą(ka) “spring equinox ceremony”

C B B C o n l a n g i n g R e l a y X I I - A w a t e s e

Part 2. Verbs

2a. Verb structure and evidentials
Verbs are morphologically complex and, when possible, appear first in a clause (Awatese is VSO). They are classed by
transitivity (intransitive or transitive), and additionally include evidentials where applicable (assumed, witness,
reportative, inferential). A templatic approach to verbs follows the below formula:

evidential - SUB - (OBJ) - verb[PLUR] - CONT - tense - NEG - COND

➔ (x) = applies to transitive verbs only

Evidential prefixes are as follows:
➔ assumed no-
➔ witnessed a-
➔ hearsay ną-

➔ inferential ni-
2b. Subject and Object

Due to suppletion and irregularity in the forms, they can’t be accurately described without using a separate table. The
subject and object pronouns are as follows:

1S.OBJ 1PE.OB
J
1PI.OBJ 2.OBJ 2F.OBJ G9.OBJ G7.OBJ GX.OBJ

1S.SUB ngą- nginu- ngimą- ngiri- ngiyi- ngątu- ngiyeng- ngihą-
1PE.SUB ngun- ngo- ngumą- ngori- ngoyi- ngotu- nguyeng- nguhą-
1PI.SUB mąng mąnu- mą- mąri- mąyi- mątu- mąyeng- mąhą-
2.SUB ning- ninu- nimą- liri- riyi- litu- niyeng- lihą-
2F.SUB eng- enu- emą- eri- eyi- etu- eyeng- ehą-
G9.SUB tung- tunu- tumą- turi- tuyi- aytu- tuyeng- tuhą-
G7.SUB ayeng- aynu- aymą- ayri- ayi- tuku- aying- ayhą-
GX.SUB ing- inu imą- iri- iyi- itu- iyeng- ihą-
For intransitive verbs, only the subject is used. The prefixes for those are:

➔ 1st person singular ngą-
➔ 1st person plural exclusive ngo-
➔ 1st person plural inclusive mą-
➔ 2nd person informal li-
➔ 2nd person formal i-
➔ 3rd person animate (G9) tu-
➔ 3rd person semianimate (G7) nge-
➔ 3rd person inanimate (GX) ą-

C B B C o n l a n g i n g R e l a y X I I - A w a t e s e

2c. Pluractionality: the reduplicative nightmare
As you can see, the text contains some monstrously long words, a hallmark of Awatese. This is mainly due to
pluractionality. When the subject of a verb is NOT first person AND also plural, the verb is reduplicated fully to express
pluractionality. (Bonus: a few collective nouns are also reduplicated forms of other nouns.)
ąx “to go” (base form)
tuhąx “he/she/it goes, is going” (conjugated, no pluractionality)
tuhąxąx “they go, are going” (conjugated, with pluractionality)
2d. The copula
The infinitive (to be) is ina (this is also in the glossary). Evidentiality and other affixes apply normally to the base verb
conjugation. The conjugated forms are as follows:
Subject Present Past Future
1st singular yi yiyo yiłu
1st plural exclusive ngi ngiyo ngiłu
1st plural inclusive yimą yimąyo yimąłu
2nd person yori yoriyo yoriłu
2nd person formal yoka yokayo yokału
3rd animate (G9) yąn yąnyo yąnłu
3rd semianimate (G7) yeng yengyo yengłu
3rd inanimate (GX) yił yiłyo yiłu

2e. Everything else
➔ Participles have no specific marking and appear as normal conjugated verbs.
➔ Continuous aspect consists of one suffix, directly after the verb. This suffix is -ąt.
➔ Awatese tenses are past, present, and future, The suffixes are as follows:
◆ present (none)
◆ past -yo
◆ future -łu
➔ Negative suffix is -pą.
➔ Conditional suffix is -řu.
➔ Passive particle is ątu and comes before a verb:
◆ ąnima = it protects; ątu ąnima = it is protected

C B B C o n l a n g i n g R e l a y X I I - A w a t e s e

Part 3. Adpositions
Adpositions come after the noun they modify and express the grammatical gender of that noun. If the modified noun is
animate (G9), the adposition is suffixed with -tą; the suffix is -yą for semianimate (G7) nouns, and -hą for inanimate
(GX) nouns.
Part 4. The Definite Article
The definite article is a. The syntactic position of the definite article depends on context and the parts of speech and
possession of the words around it.
Example:
a łąhułąhu “the gods”
a tąnya “the altar”
łąhułąhu a tąnyatą “the altar of the gods, the gods’ altar”
tąnya a łąhułąhuhą “the gods of the altar, the altar’s gods”
In a possessive construction where the definite article intercedes between the possessed object and the possessor, the
word order serves as a kind of focalizer.
Example:
pumutą a yiną "the milk that the child has"
yiną a pumutą "the child's milk"