116.5: Kernovan Conjuring

The Kernovan Conjuring (Borlish Conjuraçon Cornovan /ˌkɔɲ.ʒɪˈrants ˌkɔr.noˈvan/) was a collaboration between the Kingdom of Greater Devon and Roger Drengot, Duke of Normandy to press the Duke's claim to the throne of Kent. This plot is considered the proximate cause for the creation of the First Drengot Empire across Gaul [France] and southern Albion [Great Britain].

The Conjuring was carried out in 1029, following the death of King Rodulf of Kent. Kent under the long-reigning Rodulf had prospered, with recognised supremacy over the rump Wessex (albeit not uncontested by Devon) and over Essex to the north. After eight decades of political manoeuvring, Rodulf lingered on his deathbed and the succession was deeply uncertain.

Although no references to a written treaty have survived, it is presumed that the House of Kernow aided Normandy in their bid for the Kentish throne in exchange for support in becoming the new ruling dynasty of Greater Devon. This bargain was upheld, but it only took a couple of decades for Greater Devon to become a vassal of the First Drengot Empire.

In what was either impressive long-term strategy or merely opportunism, the victorious Roger of Normandy would go on to conquer Kent's neighbours, including Essex and Markland, and then venture south to annex much of the rest of Gaul. He was crowned Emperor Roger I in the midst of this territorial expansion in 1038.

The recently-unified Wales under Cadwallan (erstwhile King of Wynneth) managed to remain mostly free of Drengot control. This was likely achieved by steering a course between Greater Devon and the Drengot, neither of whom wanted to other to have dominion over Wales.

## 

117.1: New Urban Mesh

notes in translation on the subject of the New Urban Mesh.

Y Nou Sar Urban intermane un alleyanç de citað autonom naðusc n'Europ norðovester durant y siecr novoç.
The New Urban Mesh was an alliance of somewhat autonomous cities in Northwest Europe in the nineteenth century.

Parmy sy sodal stan Londr, Conster, Ausbagn, Pentros, Amstel, Anvers e Gant.
Among its members were London, Conster [Colchester], Axbane, Pentrose, Amstel [Amsterdam], Anvers [Antwerp] and Gant [Ghent].

Y Sar smargoy cos contemporane e parallel a apprestanç politic comportant allors, tal com y Citað Floyan lonc y Danau.
The Mesh emerged contemporaneously with similar political structures elsewhere, such as the Riverine Cities along the Danaw [Danube].

Plusour parmy y citað ag Sar stan cos simoltane part de polity ja sceint (com bustr, Ausbagn e Pentros no stan jamay sovran a verb deur Istr Boral).
Several of the Mesh's cities were simultaneously part of pre-existing polities (for example, Axbane and Pentrose were never legally independent from Borland).

L'oc ort de tal federaç de stat citaðer se caf ascreut all'aðoinç pouvlancer eð y crescenç de citað rapid tras l'approism dell'epoc all'Atelier Mondial.
This rise of such federacies of city-states has been attributed to the rapid population growth and expansion of cities in the run-up to the Global Workshop period.

Y Sar cos particuler sta ag rostr de machinaçon cas vascel costroinç, eð i poðe un ronç remarcabr cavir dy recoglenç de carbon mondial.
The Mesh in particular was at the forefront of shipbuilding technology, and had access to an appreciable fraction of the world's coal production.
